Becoming a first time investor has become pretty popular in recent years! According to the 2021 CNBC/Momentive’s Invest In You Poll, 59% of respondents aged 18-34 years old began investing in 2020.  

And 57% of those 18-34 year olds reported using self-service mobile apps to invest. Why? Probably because investment apps make it relatively cheap and easy to start investing as a beginner – even if you don’t know much about the stock market.

Investing apps also make it possible to put investing on auto-pilot so you can reach your financial goals without having to constantly monitor the stock market.  

With over 5 million registered users, Stash is one of the most popular investment apps among new investors. One of the reasons for that is because Stash makes it possible to invest on a budget as low as $5/month! But, as you may know, Stash isn’t your only option for investment apps.  

That’s why, in this Stash review, we’ll help you decide if it’s the right one for you by answering common questions like:

What is Stash?
How does Stash work? 
How much does opening an account cost?
What are the pros and cons of Stash for a beginner investor?
What do you need to open an account? 
How do you set up an account? 
How much money can you make with Stash? 
How do you withdraw your money from Stash? 

Feel free to read along in that order. Or, jump ahead to the section that interests you most right now. Either way, let’s begin! 

What Is Stash?

Stash is an investment app that makes it easy for you to invest small amounts of money in the stock market. Currently, there are more than 5 million Stash customers who use the app to invest as little as $5 a month. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AHhbApto_n4

How Does Stash Work?

$5 a month isn’t much. And, so, you may be wondering: how is that even possible when you consider that buying even 1 stock in any major US company can cost thousands of dollars? Is Stash legit for investing if your monthly contribution is a fraction of how much stocks really cost? 

Good questions! And both of them can be answered by explaining how Stash works.

By investing with Stash, what you’re really doing is buying a portion of a share of a stock. These are called fractional shares. For example, instead of buying 1 whole share of stock in a company like Apple, you can buy 1/20 of a share and still earn some money if the stock performs well. 

But Stash isn’t the only finance app that lets you buy fractional shares. That’s a common feature among other micro-investing apps like Acorns. What makes Stash different from its competitors are the features and benefits that come with their subscription plans.  

How Much Does Stash Cost? 

When you sign up for Stash, you have 2 subscription plans to choose from: Stash Growth, Stash+. Here’s how much is each plan’s monthly fee, who the plan is best for, and its additional benefits. 

 

	Monthly Fee      	Ideal User	Additional Benefits
Stash Growth	$3	People who want to expand their long-term wealth building plan	
Personal investment account
Stock-Back® Card
Saving tools
Personalized financial advice
A Roth or Traditional retirement account
$1,000 of life insurance coverage through Avibra1

Stash+	$9	Savvy wealth builders and debit card spenders	
Personal investment account
Stock-Back® Card
Saving tools
Personalized financial advice
A Roth or Traditional retirement account
Exclusive monthly market insights report
$10,000 of life insurance coverage through Avibra1

 

Pros and Cons of the Stash App 

Stash makes investing as a beginner easy. But that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s the right way for you to start investing. So, here’s a list of the pros and cons to help you decide whether you want to open a Stash investment account. 

Pros

Cheap introduction to investing. By buying fractional shares, you can create an investment portfolio on Stash with just 1 cent. Unlike most brokerage accounts, there’s also no minimum balance needed to start a Stash investment account. 

Automated investing. Within your investment account, you can set up how much money you want to automatically invest each month and which stocks and ETFs you want to invest in. Then, the money gets pulled right from your bank account (almost like an automatic bill payment) and you can let your investments build on auto-pilot. 

You can also have your purchases rounded up to the nearest dollar so that, once you reach $5, that money automatically gets invested. 

Beginner-friendly educational content. The Stash app has educational content that teaches you the basics of investing and shares investment advice so you can learn how to invest on your own.

Balanced investment portfolios. With a Stash Growth or Stash+ subscription, you can sign up for a Stash Smart Portfolio, which helps you manage some of the risks involved with investing by creating a balanced portfolio. 

Stock back rewards. When you shop using the Stock-Back® debit Card*, you get rewarded with money that automatically goes toward building your investment portfolio. 

Cons

High monthly fees for small investment accounts. If you only plan on investing a small amount of money per month, the fees for any of Stash’s membership plans are higher than you’d find from some other investment options. 

Note: This con can be avoided if you use your Stash debit card on regular expenses (e.g. gas, Netflix, groceries) to earn enough rewards to cancel out the low monthly fees. 

No personalized investment advice. If you want tailor made investment advice on topics like  how to build a strategic investment portfolio, you won’t get that from Stash. For that, you’d need to speak with a certified financial advisor or wealth management service. 

High expenses on ETFs. The exchange-traded funds on Stash have relatively high expense ratios when compared to some other investing platforms. That means you’ll pay more for operational expenses (e.g. administrative costs to manage the fund) than you might elsewhere.

Note: All ETFs charge shareholders an expense ratio.  This is true whether you choose to invest with Stash or, for example, with a brokerage account.

What Do You Need to Open an Account on the Stash App?

Does Stash sound like a good way for you to start investing? Awesome! But, first, make sure you meet the basic eligibility requirements to open an account:  

Be at least 18 years old
Be a U.S. citizen, permanent U.S. resident, or holder of certain U.S. visa types 
Have an active checking account
How to Sign Up for Stash 

You can open an account on Stash today and begin investing this week! Here’s everything you need to do to open your account in around 30 minutes.

Step 1 – Download The Stash App

You can download the Stash app and open an account on Stash’s website. 

 

Step 2 – Click Get Started And Provide Your Details 

When opening your Stash account, you’ll be asked to share your:

Email address 
Cell phone number 
Mailing address
Social security number 
Pre-tax annual income 

This information is used to verify your identity and set up your Stash account.  

Step 3 – Select Your Subscription Plan 

Next, you need to select which of the Stash subscription plans best meets your investment  goals. 

As a reminder, Stash Growth costs $3/month, and Stash+ costs $9/month. You can pay for the subscription using a credit or debit card.

Currently, Stash is also offering new users the 1st month free! They also will give you a $5 bonus credit to put toward buying stock in companies like Apple or Tesla.

Step 4 – Answer Questions About Your Investing Goals And Risk Tolerance

Next, Stash will ask you to create your investment profile. To start, the app will ask you questions about:

Your employment status 
Your estimated net worth 
Your tax filing status for this year 
Whether you’re currently saving for retirement 
How much experience you have with investing 
How much risk you want to take while investing 
When you plan to withdraw the money you invest 

They’ll use your answers to all of those questions to provide recommendations as you build your investment portfolio.

Step 5 – Secure Your Account 

Now, you need to secure your account. For that, all you need to do is provide your social security number. 

You’ll also be asked some legally required questions and if you’d like to add a trusted contact in case there’s any suspicion of fraud. But answering the legal questions takes 1-2 minutes as they don’t apply to most people. And adding a trusted contact is optional. 

Step 6 – Set Up Automatic Funding 

Next, you’ll be asked to fund your accounts. To do that, you’ll be asked to select a transfer schedule for your personal investment portfolio and Stash banking account. 

You can choose to put nothing in the Stash banking account. But if you want to get the Stock-Back® Card that rewards you with stock after certain purchases, you need to deposit money in your Stash banking account. 

You can change your automatic money transfer schedule at any time. 

Step 7 – Link Your Bank Account

To fund your account, you’ll need to transfer funds from a checking account. So, the next step is linking your bank account. 

But before Stash can link your checking account, you’ll need to verify that the account is yours. Depending on the method you use, this can be done instantly (using Plaid) or manually, which takes around 3 business days. 

Once the account is linked, it takes an additional 2-4 business days for the money to transfer from your checking account to your Stash account. 

Note: You cannot fund your Stash investment or banking account using a credit card. 

Step 8 – Decide Whether You’d Like To Invite A Friend 

You’re almost done with setting up your account now. Now, you just need to decide whether you’d like to refer a friend to Stash. 

This step is optional. So, no worries if you’d like to try Stash on your own before recommending it to anyone else. 

But, if you do refer a friend and that friend opens a Stash account, you could both receive a $20 credit to buy stock in a company of your choosing. You can also refer your friends later and earn up to $1,000 in bonus investments. 

Step 9 – Choose Your Investments 

Once the funds reach your account, you can begin choosing your investments. 

If you’re not sure what to invest in yet, you may want to consider subscribing to the Stash Growth or Stash+ plans. As a member of either plan, you gain access to Stash Smart Portfolios. These investment portfolios are automatically balanced and managed by Stash to fit your risk tolerance. 

If you want to invest on your own, you’ll buy stocks through your Personal Portfolio. Within the Personal Portfolio, you can search companies and ETFs. 

Although the Personal Portfolio is less hands-off than a Smart Portfolio, Stash still makes using this DIY investment portfolio easy to use for beginners by showing you a curated selection of stocks, companies by industry, and ETFs by categories that are easy to understand.

You can also take advantage of the investment advice within the app to learn more about how to invest in stocks and ETFs.

How Much Money Can You Make With Stash?

Stash is just like any other investment account. And investing involves risk, which means, there’s no guaranteed amount of money you can make. It all depends on things outside of Stash’s control like the state of the stock market when you’re ready to withdraw. 

That being said, learning how to invest in the stock market early in life is one of the best ways to build wealth over the long term. And, the earlier you start, the better!

How to Withdraw Money From Stash

If at any point you’d like to withdraw your money from your Stash investment or Stash banking account, you can do it easily by following these instructions: 

Using the app:

Open the app
Tap the Transfer button on the bottom of the screen
Select the accounts you wish to move money from and to
Enter the amount you wish to transfer
Tap Continue to move forward
Tap Transfer to confirm the transaction

On the Stash website:

Go to Stash.com
Select Home on the navigation bar
Select Personal portfolio
Select Transfer
Select the account you wish to move money from and to
Enter the amount you wish to transfer 
Click Confirm to move forward
Click Make Transfer to confirm the transaction

Note: When you withdraw money, it will be taken out of your Stash accounts immediately. But it can take up to 5 business days for that money to arrive in your bank account.  

Final Thoughts

If you’re on a budget yet want to start investing to prepare for your future, Stash is a great option. Because Stash lets you buy fractional shares, you can invest with as little as $5/month! 

On top of that, Stash makes it easy to set your investment strategy on auto-pilot with: 

Automatic transfers from your bank account to your investment portfolio
Stock back rewards to purchase stocks just by using the Stock-Back® debit card
The option to round up purchases made with your card to the nearest dollar and invest the change when it reaches a total of $5

Oh! Don’t forget that if you sign up now, you can also get your first month free and $5 credit to invest in a stock of your choice! To get the credit, you need to successfully open a Personal Portfolio, link a funding source and deposit at least $5. This applies to Stash Growth, and Stash+ plans.

And if you want more financial tips for beginners, be sure to also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics like the best ways to make an extra $500 a month and how to build credit fast. 

 

Disclosures

Paid non-client endorsement. Not representative of all clients and not a guarantee. View important disclosures. Offer is subject to T&Cs. Promotion is not sponsored or endorsed by Green Dot, Green Dot Corporation, Visa U.S.A. Inc., or any of their respective affiliates, and none of the foregoing has any responsibility to fulfill any funds earned through this promotion.
* All rewards earned through use of the Stash Visa Debit card (Stock-Back® Card) will be fulfilled by Stash Investments LLC. Rewards will go to your Stash personal investment account, which is not FDIC insured. You will bear the standard fees and expenses reflected in the pricing of the investments that you earn, plus fees for various ancillary services charged by Stash. Stash Stock-Back® Rewards is not sponsored or endorsed by Green Dot Bank, Green Dot Corporation, Visa U.S.A., or any of their respective affiliates.
Please review the Referral T&Cs. To participate and receive cash bonuses or stock rewards, you must: (i) successfully open a Personal Portfolio (ii) send a referral invitation to a friend and (iii) your friend must complete the account opening process. Your referee friend must (i) complete the process of opening an account by using the invitation referral link (ii) link a funding account and (iii) deposit at least one cent ($0.01) into their account.
Fractional shares start at $0.05 for investments that cost $1,000+ per share.
1 Group life insurance coverage provided through Avibra, Inc. Stash is a paid partner of Avibra. Only individuals ages 18-54 and who are residents of one of the 50 U.S. states or DC are eligible for group life insurance coverage, subject to availability. Individuals with certain pre-existing medical conditions may not be eligible for the full coverage above, but may instead receive less coverage. All insurance products are subject to state availability, issue limitations and contractual terms and conditions, any of which may change at any time and without notice. Please see Terms and Conditions for full details. Stash may receive compensation from business partners in connection with certain promotions in which Stash refers clients to such partners for the purchase of non-investment consumer products or services. This type of marketing partnership gives Stash an incentive to refer clients to business partners instead of to businesses that are not partners of Stash. This conflict of interest affects the ability of Stash to provide clients with unbiased, objective promotions concerning the products and services of its business partners. This could mean that the products and/or services of other businesses, that do not compensate Stash, may be more appropriate for a client than the products and/or services of Stash’s business partners. Clients are, however, not required to purchase the products and services Stash promotes.
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Let’s be real: Investing in the stock market as a beginner can be… tricky. But it’s also one of the best ways to build wealth–especially if you start when you’re young! 

So, if the idea of using an investing app like Acorns is exciting to you, we completely understand! The Acorns app makes it easy to start investing with very little money and a basic understanding of how the stock market works.

But…

It’s also not your only option for a beginner-friendly investing app. That’s why, in this Acorns review, we’ll be helping you decide whether you want to use Acorns to invest by looking at:

How the Acorns app works
The major pros and cons of Acorns
Whether Acorns is a good choice for college students and recent grads

Disclaimer: Now, it’s important you know the information we’ll share here is meant to be educational only. It should not be taken as financial advice. For that, you’ll need to speak to a professional financial advisor. Our blog posts may also contain affiliate links that, at no cost to you, may earn us a small commission.

But if you decide you do want to give Acorns a try, we’ll also walk you through how to sign up for Acorns and begin using the platform to invest. But, first, let’s talk a little bit more about…

What Is Acorns?

Acorns is one of the most popular investing apps on the market with over 4.7 million subscribers. One of its defining features is that it helps you save and invest your spare change.

For example, if you have $0.50 to spare, Acorns can help you invest that money in a portfolio of ETFs (exchange traded funds).

Now, if you know anything about how much even a single share of stock costs, then you also know $0.50 usually isn’t enough to invest in much of anything. But with Acorns, you can. So…

How Does Acorns Work?

The premise behind Acorns is simple: the app rounds up purchases made using your credit or debit card so you can invest your spare change into the stock market. 

For example, let’s say tomorrow your lunch costs $12.50. The Acorns app will round up your purchase to $13 and put the extra $0.50 into your investment account.

Round-Up investments from your checking account will be swept to your Acorns investment account when your accrued Round-Ups® reach or exceed $5.  But you can also directly deposit money into your Acorns investment account to get started right away.

But, still, how is that $5 minimum enough to make an investment? Micro-investing.

What’s micro-investing?

Micro-investing is an investment strategy that allows you to invest small amounts of money into stocks, bonds, ETFs and other securities. When you micro-invest, you don’t need to have enough money to buy an entire share of stock. Instead, you buy a fractional share.

What’s a fractional share?

A fractional share is a piece of a company’s stock. When you buy fractional shares, you’re buying a percentage, rather than a full share of stock.

It may not sound like much, but over time those fractional shares can add up! And that’s where the Acorns app comes in… For a while, it may seem like you’ve barely invested enough money to matter. But, if you stick with it, you’ll (hopefully) see your account balance begin to grow over time.

Why did we say “hopefully”?

You need to know that with any investment strategy, tool, or app–there is some risk. There is no way of guaranteeing that you’ll make money when you invest in the stock market. Why? The stock market is ever-changing, which means that the value of stocks can go up or down without any warning.

So, what does that mean for you and the Acorns app? It’s important to remember that when you’re using Acorns (or any other investment tool), your investments are subject to market risk. That means that you could lose money. But, still, it also means you can make money.

How Much Does Acorns Cost?

Acorns charges a monthly subscription fee and the cost depends on which plan you choose. Your options are the Personal Plan or the Family Plan.

The Acorns Personal Account costs $3 per month and includes:

An investment account
A retirement account
A checking account

The Acorns Family Account costs $5 per month and includes:

An investment account
A retirement account
A checking account
An investment account for kids
The Pros and Cons of the Acorns App

There’s no perfect way to start investing. You’ll have to experiment a bit to find the method that works best for you. Here are the major pros and cons of the Acorns app to help you decide if it’s the right investment tool for your financial goals.

The Pros of the Acorns App

If you’re new to investing, you’ll likely enjoy the following pros of using the Acorns app.

You don’t need a lot of money to start investing

It’s a great way to start investing in the stock market, even if you don’t have a lot of money. The Acorns app rounds up your spare change to the nearest dollar and invests that money for you. You can get started with as little as $5.

It’s a hands-off way of investing

Once you’ve set up your account and completed your investment profile, the Acorns app can do the rest of the work for you.  It will recommend a portfolio based on your goals, automatically invest your money if elected and rebalance your portfolio as needed.

You can learn about investing 

The Acorns app is a great way to learn the basics of investing. You can see how the stock market works and how investments perform.

The app is very user-friendly and easy to navigate

Even if you have no experience with investing, you’ll have an easy time seeing your account activity, reviewing performance and increasing your investment knowledge.

There are no fees for withdrawals or deposits

One of the great things about the Acorns app is that you can withdraw your money at any time without any fees. This is great if you need to access your money for an emergency or unexpected expense.  (There may be tax implications associated with selling holdings in your portfolio.  Please consult a tax advisor with questions regarding your personal tax treatment.)

The Cons of the Acorns App

While the Acorns app does have some great features, it’s not perfect and may not be the right investment app for you. Here are the major cons of the Acorns app.

There are subscription fees for using the app

Of course, there are some fees associated with  your Acorns account. And while those monthly subscription fees are relatively low ($3 or $5 per/month depending on the tier you choose), they can add up if you’re only using Acorns to invest a small amount.

Your investment options are limited

On the Acorns app, you’re only able to invest in a limited number of investment options. You’re not able to choose individual stocks, which means you have less control over your money. However, Acorns has recently made it possible to invest in a bitcoin-linked ETF!

You don’t get personalized investment advice

The Acorns app doesn’t offer much in terms of personalized investment advice.  If you’re new to investing, you might not know where to start, which investing strategies are suitable for your goals, or how much risk you should take on. In which case, you may want to speak to human financial advisors.

There’s no tax-loss harvesting

Acorns accounts also don’t offer tax-loss harvesting, which is a way to reduce your taxes by selling investments that have lost money and using those losses to offset any capital gains you might have.

So, Is Acorns a Good Investment App for College Students and Young Adults?

There really isn’t one definitive answer to this because it depends on your individual circumstances. If you’re someone who is just starting out and wants to get your feet wet in the world of investing, Acorns may be a great way to do it. The app makes investing super simple and easy to understand.

However, if you’re looking for more features and customization, you might want to look into other ways of investing, such as traditional brokerage firms.

How to Create an Account with Acorns

If you’ve decided you want to open an Acorns investing account, here are all the steps you’ll take to get started. It’s pretty simple and only takes around 5 minutes!

Step 1: Go to the Acorns website and click “Sign Up”

You’ll need to decide whether you’d like to sign up for a Personal or Family account. Once you decide on your account type, you’ll be asked to enter your preferred email address and create a password.

You can also do this on the Acorns app, which you can download in the Google Play Store or Apple Apps Store.

Step 2: Connect your bank account

You’ll need to enter your bank login information and details about the credit or debit card you’d like to link. That way, the Acorns can connect to your linked account and begin withdrawing the spare change from your purchases. You can also use your linked bank account to add funds to your investment account. 

Step 3: Add your personal and contact information

Next, you’ll be asked to enter your:

Legal first and last name
Date of birth
Social security number
U.S. citizenship status
Address
Phone number
Step 4: Verify your phone number

Next, you’ll need to verify the phone number you shared during step 3. You’ll be sent a verification code by text message.

Step 5: Protect your account with security questions

After that, you’ll be asked to create security questions. These will be used to verify your identity if you ever need to reset your password.

Step 6: Answer questions about your investing goals and risk tolerance

Now, you’ll need to answer some questions about your current financial situation, investment goals, and risk tolerance. This will help Acorns get to know you and make a better investment recommendation for you.

Step 7: Answer questions about your familiarity with investing

Next, you’ll be asked if you are any of the following:

Affiliated with a broker-dealer
A 10% shareholder or director of a publicly traded company
Subject to backup withholding by the IRS  

If your answer is ‘no’, you’ll just click “None of these apply to me.”

Step 8: Review your investment recommendation

Based on the information you’ve entered, Acorns will recommend a portfolio of ETFs that are aligned with your goals.  You can decide to override this recommendation after the registration process if you wish.

Step 9: Accept the referral disclosure

The final step is to sign and accept the referral disclosure. This lets you know that another account may receive compensation if you sign up for the app using a referral link.

And that’s it! You’ve now successfully set up your Acorns account and can start investing. Of course, you still may be wondering…

How to Start Investing with Acorns

Now that you’ve set up your account, it’s time to start thinking about how to make your first investment. There are a few options. And, if you’ve never invested before, it can be confusing. So, let’s go through the two basic steps to help you get started! 

Deposit money into your account

When you first open your account, your balance will be $0. So, the first step is transferring funds from your linked bank account.

To do that, you’ll click on the button that says “One-Time” at the top of the app. Then, you can choose how much money want to invest, with a minimum of $5. 

It may take 1-3 business days for the money to appear in your Acorns account. You can also choose to set up a recurring deposit so that money regularly transfers from your bank account to your Acorns investment account.

To learn more, you can also check out our beginner’s guide to investing! 

Final Thoughts

Overall, Acorns may be a good way for college students and young adults to get started with investing. It’s easy to use and low cost, making it a great investment tool for beginners.

However, there are some drawbacks — the main one being the subscription fees, which can eat away at a low investment balance. You’re also not able to purchase individual stocks on Acorns

That being said, Acorns’s round-up to the nearest dollar feature and automatic investments are great if you want a hands-off approach to investing over time. So, if that’s what you’re after, sign up today to open an Acorns investment account.

And, if you’re looking for more beginner finance tips, check out the rest of our blog where we share advice on things like how to save money in college and how to build credit fast!

 

Important Disclosures

The content is for informational purposes only and should not be considered a replacement for individualized financial advice.  This is an Ad for Acorns and the material may be biased.  Compensation creates an incentive for the promoter to recommend Acorns.  The content was not created by a financial professional.  
Investing involves risk, including loss of principal.  Please consider, among other important factors, your investment objectives, risk tolerance and Acorns’ pricing before investing.  
Round-Ups® are transferred from your linked funding source (checking account) to your Acorns Invest account, where the funds are invested into a portfolio of selected ETFs. Only purchases made with Round-Up accounts linked to your Acorns account with the feature activated are eligible for the Round- Ups® feature. Round-Up investments from your funding source will be processed when your Pending Round-Ups® reach or exceed $5.  
A properly suggested portfolio recommendation is dependent upon current and accurate financial and risk profiles. Clients who have experienced changes to their goals, financial circumstances or investment objectives, or who wish to modify their portfolio recommendation, should promptly update their information in the Acorns app or through the website. 
Acorns Subscription Fees are assessed based on the tier of services in which you are enrolled.   
Acorns is not a bank.  Acorns Pay, LLC offers an Acorns Checking deposit account, FDIC insured up to $250,000.  Acorns Visa™ debit cards and banking services are issued by Lincoln Savings Bank or nbkc bank, Members FDIC.  
The ETFs comprising the portfolios charge fees and expenses that will reduce a client’s return. Please read each prospectus carefully before investing.
Acorns does not provide access to invest directly in Bitcoin. Bitcoin exposure is provided through the ETF BITO, which invests in Bitcoin futures. This is considered a high-risk investment given the speculative and volatile nature. 
Acorns Earn provides subscribers access to shop with our partners and earn bonus investments into your Acorns Invest portfolios when purchasing items from the partner brands.  
No investment strategy and no level of diversification or asset allocation can ensure profits or guarantee against losses.
Investment advisory services offered by Acorns Advisers, LLC (Acorns), an SEC-registered investment advisor. Brokerage services are provided to clients of Acorns by Acorns Securities, LLC, an SEC-registered broker-dealer and member FINRA/SIPC.
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Let’s be honest. Sticking to a budget is NOT easy or fun – especially if you’re a college student or fresh graduate on a low income. But having a budget is one of the best ways to pull yourself out of a poor financial situation and set yourself up for financial security down the line. 

Well… it can be. But only if you know how to develop a realistic budget for yourself. Do you know how to do that? If you’re currently shaking your head thinking “NO”, don’t worry. We got you!

Source

In this blog post, we’re gonna teach you how to budget money on a low income by sharing our favorite budgeting strategies that go beyond the common advice you may be used to (e.g. “just start eating at home”). 

But before we get into those budgeting strategies, let’s have a quick chat about why you and most people tend to find sticking to a budget to be incredibly hard.  

Why Is Budgeting Hard (Even for People With High Income)?

You’re not alone. Even people with high income can sometimes find it difficult to stay on top of their finances and make ends meet. According to a recent survey, 36% of people making over $100,000 a year live paycheck to paycheck.  

How is that even possible? Well, there are definitely external factors, like rising costs due to inflation. But, for many people, things like a lack of financial literacy and a poor money mindset play a role. And those two things can make budgeting hard no matter how much money you make. 

On top of that, most budgeting advice sets you up to fail. 

The problem with most budgeting advice 

Most of the budgeting advice out there tends to focus too much on things like cutting back on coffee or eating out. But small changes like that are not going to make a big enough difference overall. 

Most budgeting advice also doesn’t take into account the emotional component of money. For example, if you’re used to using shopping as a way to cope with stress, simply telling yourself to stop spending isn’t going to work.

So, you need a budget that works for your lifestyle AND doesn’t make you feel like you’re constantly depriving yourself AND helps you get out of the low-income bracket.

To help you get started, we’ve put together 7 of the best low-income budgeting strategies.

7 Low-Income Budgeting Strategies
#1 Write down your monthly income

The first step to creating a budget is understanding your income and expenses. This means sitting down to write out how much money you have coming in from all sources every month.

If you have a job, this is usually pretty straightforward. But don’t forget to include other sources of income, such as scholarships, grants, stipends, and money from side hustles.

Once you have your total monthly income figure, you can use the following strategies to start looking at ways to budget that money.

#2 Track your spending for a month

The next step is to track your spending for at least one month. There are a few ways to do this, but the easiest is to use a budgeting app like Rocket Money.

Rocket Money allows you to connect your bank and credit card accounts so you can track your spending automatically. This makes it super easy to see where your money is going and how much you’re spending in each category.

If you don’t want to use a budgeting app, you can also track your spending manually. Just write down everything you spend for one month, including even small purchases like coffee or snacks.

At the end of the month, take a look at your spending and see where you can cut back. Maybe you’re spending too much on entertainment or maybe you need to save more for transportation. Whatever it is, knowing where your money is going is an essential step to budgeting on a low income.

#3 Monitor your debt and credit score

If you have debt, it’s important to keep track of how much you owe and make payments on time. Late payments can damage your credit score, which can make it harder to do things like get a loan or rent an apartment.

You should also check your credit score by using a free service like Credit Karma. Monitoring your credit score is a good way to catch errors on your credit report and make sure you’re on track to improve your credit. 

You’ll want to use the information you find to make a plan to build your credit. For example, you can work on paying down debt, which will help improve your credit utilization ratio. You can also work on building up a positive payment history by making at least all of the minimum payments on time.

For more ways to build credit, you can also look into getting a secure credit card from Sable, an online banking service that helps users establish good credit scores. Another option is to use a credit-building service like Kikoff, which can help you build a positive payment history by putting you on a plan to reduce your credit utilization. 

#4 Find and cut unnecessary expenses 

One of the best ways to save money is to find and get rid of hidden, unnecessary expenses. You may be surprised how many “extras” you’re paying for that you don’t even realize. One survey found that thousands of Americans waste $348/year on unused subscriptions!

For example, you may have a gym membership that you never use, or you may be paying for a streaming subscription service that you don’t need. If you can identify these hidden expenses and get rid of them, you’ll be able to save a lot of money.

To find these hidden expenses, start by looking at your bank statements and credit card bills. See if there are any charges that you don’t recognize. If so, try to figure out what they are and whether or not you really need them. Rocket Money is also an excellent tool for this!

#5 Separate your money into different bank accounts 

One of the best ways to budget money on a low income is to separate your money into different bank accounts. This way, you can easily see how much money you have for different expenses.

For example, you may want to have one account for your rent and utilities, another account for food and groceries, and another account for entertainment and leisure. This will help you to better keep track of your spending and make sure that you’re not overspending in any one area.

If you apply this budgeting strategy, make sure to open bank accounts that don’t have monthly fees or overdraft fees. You want to keep as much of your money as possible. Albert is a good example of a banking service that helps you do exactly that.

And if you have any extra money at the end of the month, consider opening a high-yield savings account. It’s better to have it sit into this type of account than a checking account. Why?  Because high-yield savings accounts reward you with a small percentage of additional money just for saving your money there.  

#6 Make a plan to increase your income

No matter how much you budget and save, there’s only so much you can do if your income is low. So, if you’re serious about improving your financial situation in the long term you need to make a plan to increase your income. 

But we know… it’s easy to say that yet hard to actually do it – especially in the current economic downturn. But that doesn’t mean it’s impossible. Here are common options for increasing your income:

Ask for a raise at your current job 
Get a new, higher-paying job
Start a side hustle 
Get a second job

Which one should you choose? That’s up to you to decide. But you can click the links above to learn how to strategically approach the options that appeal to you most.

No matter which route you take, make sure that you have a solid plan in place. This will help to ensure that you are making the most of your time and effort.

#7 Create SMART financial goals

If you want to successfully budget on a low income, set some financial goals. And to give yourself the best chance at following through, your financial goals should be SMART. 

SMART is a popular acronym to help you remember the most important qualities of a goal. It stands for Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. So, how do you create SMART financial goals? Like this: 

Specific. When it comes to budgeting and goal-setting, the more specific you can be, the better. When setting a financial goal, don’t make a vague goal like, “save more money.” Decide exactly how much money you want to save or how much debt you want to pay off.

Measurable. To track your progress, your goal should be something that you can measure. For example, if your goal is to save money, you need to have a system for measuring how much money you’ve saved each month.

Achievable. When setting a financial goal, it’s important to make sure that it is achievable for YOU. There’s no point in setting a goal that you know you can’t reach. For example, let’s say you have $10,000 in debt. Is paying it all off an achievable goal in one month if you have a low income? Probably not. Give yourself more time to achieve that kind of goal. 

Realistic. For your goal to be realistic, it needs to fit within your current lifestyle. If you are a college student who lives on campus, your goal of purchasing a house is not realistic. However, if you work hard, having a goal to make an extra $500 per month from a side hustle could be a realistic goal.

Time-bound. When setting a financial goal, it’s important to set a deadline. This will help you stay on track and motivated to reach your goal. For example, if your goal is to save $1,000 in one year, you can break that down into smaller goals, such as saving $250 per quarter.

Here are some more examples of SMART financial goals:

Put $100 into a savings account by the end of each month by reducing entertainment expenses.
Pay off credit card debt within 12 months by making monthly payments of $200 or more. 
Start a side hustle to increase monthly income by $450 by the end of the year.
Final Thoughts

Setting and achieving financial goals can be challenging, especially if you are a college student or fresh grad on a low income. But we hope the budgeting strategies we’ve shared here can help you begin to set realistic goals and develop a budget that works for you.  

And if you’re looking for more beginner finance tips, check out the rest of our blog where we discuss personal finance topics like how to build an emergency fund and how to start investing in the stock market. You can also sign up for our giveaways, like our Pay Your Bills Fund, for a chance to win free money!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Tired of the broke college student stereotype? Well, these days, in the glorious age of the internet… your options for making money are practically endless. Well, maybe not endless. 

But, there are at least 39 potential online jobs for college students that can have you making GOOD money – without needing to add too much pressure to your already busy college schedule! 

And, in this guide, we’re going to look at what each of those online jobs entails, how much money you can make, where to look for work online, and where you can find more information to get started ASAP.  

At the end of the list, we also answer some FAQs and share resources on how to get over some common obstacles people face when attempting to make money online.

So, if you’re serious about making money online as a college student, read and bookmark this guide. Because we’re sharing everything you need to make it rain dolla dolla bills y’all – before you even graduate!

Source

Let’s get started by helping you choose the best online job for you! 

39 Online Jobs for College Students 
#1 Note Taker

Some students are good at taking notes. And some students… struggle. If you find yourself in the former category, you can actually make some extra cash just by taking and selling your notes for popular classes. Websites like the ones below allow you to upload your class notes, set a price, and then sell them to other students.

How much you can typically make: $100-$500/month

Where to find jobs: 

Stuvia
Nexus Notes
OneClass
Docmerit
StudySoup

Resource to help you learn more: Sell Notes For Cash – 10 Best Note Selling Websites For Students! 

#2 Online Tutor

No matter your major, there are always going to be students who need help in your area of expertise. That’s where online tutors come in! Using online tutoring websites, like the ones we share below, you can find students who need tutoring in subjects you enjoy or subjects you’ve already mastered (e.g. SAT or ACT prep). And, once you get good at it, you can charge a lot for your tutoring services!

How much you can typically make: $20–$35 per hour (Experienced SAT and ACT tutors can charge $100+/hour!) 

Where to find jobs: 

Tutorme.com
Care.com
Preply
Wyzant

Resource to help you learn more: How You Can Get Paid To Teach As An Online Tutor 

#3 Online Retail Arbitrage

You can make a decent profit by reselling items online, whether it’s on eBay, Amazon, Craigslist, or any other number of online marketplaces. The key is to find products being sold for less than they’re worth and then sell them online for a higher price. This online job is a great way to make some extra money. And it doesn’t require any special skills or experience!

How much you can typically make: $50-$500+ per month

Websites to find and resell products: 

Craigslist
Facebook MarketPlace
eBay

Resource to help you learn more:

#4 Online Personal Trainer / Fitness Coach

Do you have a passion for fitness? Help people reach their fitness goals by becoming an online personal trainer! You can create workout and nutrition plans, give advice and support to clients, and track their progress.

First, you’ll want to complete a personal training certification program, which you can do online. Then, you can start your own website and offer your services. It will take some work to get your first few clients. So, make sure to check out the resource below that will point you in the right direction! 

How much you can typically make: $15-$30/hour

Resource to help you learn more: 7 Steps to Become an Online Fitness Coach 

#5 Freelance Translator 

Do you speak more than one language fluently? If so, you could be a freelance translator! Companies and individuals all over the world need translators to help them communicate with customers and clients who speak different languages.

For example, a company may need your help translating emails, a website, or social media captions into Spanish. Or, you may be hired to transcribe and translate audio interviews that are in French.

How much you can typically make:  Around $30/hour

Where to find jobs: 

ProZ.com
Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
FlexJobs 
LinkedIn 

Resource to help you learn more: How to Get Translation Jobs With Zero Experience 

#6 Online Language Teacher

So, you can only speak one language fluently? Well, you can’t be a freelance translator but you can definitely be an online language teacher. Oftentimes, you don’t even need to be a certified teacher!

And if you’re fluent in a language that’s in high demand (e.g. English, Spanish, Chinese), you can make a killing by teaching it to students online. The best part? Using one or more of the websites below, you can find online language teaching jobs that let you set your own rates and schedule.

How much you can typically make: $15-$30/hour

Where to find jobs: 

italki
Preply
Verbling
Vipkid
Cambly
AmazingTalker 

Resource to help you learn more: Step-by-Step Guide to Becoming an Online Language Tutor 

#7 Virtual Assistant 

A virtual assistant is an online administrative assistant. This is a great job for college students because it’s very flexible and you learn a lot of skills that will benefit you in any career path. 

As a virtual assistant, your job would be to help businesses with tasks that they don’t have time for. This could include tasks like scheduling appointments, managing emails, or even social media management.

How much you can typically make: $5-$25/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
Freelancer
Indeed 
FlexJobs
VA Networking 

Resource to help you learn more: How to Become a Virtual Assistant & Land Your First Job 

#8 Blogger

Have any special interests you could talk about for hours? Of course, you do! Well, if you’re willing to put in the time to create your own blog around one of those interests, you could start earning some serious dough. 

Typically, bloggers earn money by monetizing their blog (e.g. advertisements, affiliate marketing, etc.), but there are other ways to have a profitable blog. For example, you could sell e-books, online courses, etc.

You could also become a freelance writer and write content for an already established company’s blog. If that sounds more interesting, check out the details of the next online job on this list, “Content Writer”.

How much you can typically make: $200+/month (depends on monetization strategies)

Resource to help you learn more:

#9 Freelance Content Writer

Ever heard the phrase “content is king”? Well, it’s true. And as the world of digital marketing continues to grow, so does the demand for high-quality content. That’s where you come in as a freelance content writer!

As a content writer, your job is to create content for a company’s website, blog, or social media platforms. For example, a company might ask you to write a blog post about a new product they’re launching or a “how-to” guide on a topic relevant to their ideal customer.

How much you can typically make: $15-35/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Freelancer
Upwork
Fiverr
Content Gather
ProBlogger 
PeoplePerHour
FlexJobs

Resource to help you learn more: Expert’s Guide to Becoming a Freelance Content Writer 

#10 Freelance Proofreader & Editor

If you are a college student with excellent grammar skills, you could make money online as a proofreader or editor. Your job would be to read over articles or documents and fix any errors. Why would a business pay you to do this? Because, it’s important to have error-free content, especially if you’re a business trying to build credibility.

How much you can typically make: $10-$30/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Freelancer
Upwork
Fiverr
ProBlogger 
PeoplePerHour
FlexJobs

Resource to help you learn more: How to Become a Proofreader: the Ultimate Beginner’s Guide 

#11 Freelance Copywriter

Copywriting is a form of marketing that involves creating compelling, persuasive, and interesting written content to persuade a reader to take some kind of action (e.g. purchase a product, sign up for a trial).

You can also think of copywriting as sales in written form. And depending on what you help a client to sell, you could make a lot of good money as a copywriter by writing marketing materials like:

Web pages
Sales and landing pages 
Sales and marketing emails 
Social media ads and captions 
Product descriptions 

How much you can typically make: $25-$100+/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
Freelancer
FlexJobs
LinkedIn

Resource to help you learn more: Become a Freelance Copywriter in 2022 | A Guide For Beginners 

#12 Freelance SEO Specialist

Have you ever found a company for the first time after searching for something on Google? Probably! Well, as an SEO specialist, you would help make sure that happens more often for a particular company. SEO stands for “search engine optimization”. In other words, it’s the process of making sure a website appears as high as possible in search engine results.

An SEO specialist’s responsibilities might include keyword research, optimizing website content, link building, and more. There’s a highly technical side to SEO that can take some time to learn, but there are easier aspects that you can quickly learn and offer as a service to companies. And, with a little effort, you could even learn technical SEO and be a well-rounded SEO specialist.

How much you can typically make: $15-$35/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Freelancer
Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
FlexJobs

Resource to help you learn more: How to Become an SEO Specialist 

#13 Search Engine Evaluator

A search engine evaluator is responsible for improving the accuracy and relevance of search engine results. As a college student, you can apply your research and analytical skills to help achieve this goal.

Many search engine evaluator jobs will have you work with different search engines, like Google, Bing, and Yahoo, to do things like make sure the search results are relevant to the user’s query, identify SPAM results, and more.

How much you can typically make: $12-$20/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Appen
Lionbridge AI
Workforce Logiq

Resource to help you learn more: 8 Places to Get Search Engine Evaluator Jobs  

#14 Freelance Video Editor

Most businesses these days need some form of video content, whether that be a commercial, an explainer video, or just recording events. And guess what? Those videos are rarely done in one perfect shot! They need to be edited together, which is where you’d come in as a video editor.

As a video editor, your job would be to take all the different footage from a video shoot and put it together into a cohesive story. This would involve choosing the right shots, adding transitions, adding music, and anything else that would make the final video engaging to watch.

How much you can typically make: $20-$50/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Freelancer
Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
FlexJobs

Resource to help you learn more: 7 Steps to Become a Freelance Video Editor 

#15 Freelance Podcast Editor 

Do you like listening to podcasts? Well, did you know that somebody has to edit them before they’re released? It’s true! And that somebody could be you.

Podcast editors help clean up the audio of a show, add music, and make sure everything flows smoothly. Most podcast editors work remotely, which makes it a great way to earn money online as a college student as long as you have a decent computer and editing software.

How much you can typically make: $25-$75/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Voices
Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
Freelancer
FlexJobs
LinkedIn

Resource to help you learn more:

#16 Freelance Web Designer

Every business needs a website. But not every business needs a full-time web designer on staff. That’s where you come in! As a college student, you can build websites for businesses in your spare time. Sometimes, building a website using drag-and-drop tools like Squarespace or Wix is all that’s needed. Other times, businesses need more custom solutions and will require you to have coding skills. 

You can find web development jobs by using one of the freelance sites below or by asking friends and family members, who have businesses, if they need help. And, if you’re really good, you can start your own business and build websites for other businesses full-time after graduation!

How much you can typically make: $30-$100+/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Freelancer
Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
FlexJobs

Resource to help you learn more: How to Crush it as a Freelance Web Designer in College 

#17 Freelance Graphic Designer

Have an eye for design and know your way around tools like Photoshop? You can actually get paid to design simple logos, social media covers (e.g. Twitter banners), and other marketing materials for businesses. Even if you’re a beginner, you can use free tools like Canva to get started designing!

To find businesses looking for graphic design work, create a profile on one of the websites we’ve listed below. You can also create a portfolio website and reach out directly to companies that might benefit from your graphic design work.

How much you can typically make: $10-$35/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr 
PeoplePerHour 
FlexJobs
99 Designs 
Freelancer

Resource to help you learn more:

#18 Freelance Social Media Manager 

If you’re constantly on social media and have a knack for engagement, you could make money online as a social media manager! There are thousands of companies looking for social media managers to help them grow their social media following and manage their online presence. This job might involve creating content, managing a team of social media influencers, or doing a little bit of both.

How much you can typically make: $20-$30/hour 

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr 
PeoplePerHour 
FlexJobs
Freelancer

Resource to help you learn more: How to Become a Social Media Manager 

#19 Freelance PPC Marketing Specialist

When it comes to online marketing, Pay-Per-Click (PPC) advertising is still one of the most effective methods out there. And as a PPC marketing specialist, it’s your job to make sure that those ads are effective and bring in the results your clients need. Specifically, you’d be responsible for managing and optimizing campaigns on Google Ads, Bing Ads, Amazon Advertising, and other PPC platforms.

If you’ve never done anything like that, it may sound intimidating. But don’t worry! There are lots of online resources that can teach you the ropes. And once you get the hang of it, it’s actually a pretty fun and challenging way to make money.

How much you can typically make: $20-$30/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
Freelancer
FlexJobs

Resource to help you learn more: How To Start Your Own Freelance PPC Side Hustle Today 

#20 YouTuber

One of the most popular ways for college students to make money online is by becoming a YouTuber. If you can create videos that are entertaining, informative, or both, you can make a decent amount of money from advertising revenue.

But don’t be fooled! Making money on YouTube isn’t as easy as it sounds. You’ll need to put in a lot of time and effort, and you may not see any return for months (or even years). 

How much you can typically make: $3-$5 per 1,000 video views

Resource to help you learn more: How to Make Money on YouTube (Step by Step Guide for Beginners) 

#21 Social Media Influencer / Brand Ambassador 

Here’s another popular online job for college students that is not as easy as it sounds! As a social media influencer or brand ambassador, you’d be responsible for promoting a company or product on your social media channels. This could involve creating and sharing original content, running giveaways, or providing exclusive discounts to your followers.

To be successful in this role, you need to have a strong social media presence with a large following. You also need to be able to show that you’re influential in your niche and can persuade others to take action.

How much you can typically make: Depends on the brand and products you promote

Resource to help you learn more: 7 Steps to Becoming a Social Media Influencer  

#22 Freelance PowerPoint Presentation Specialist

Companies use PowerPoint presentations for all sorts of things, from sales pitches to training materials. If you’re good at using PowerPoint and have some creative ideas, you can offer to do freelance work as a PowerPoint specialist. Your job would be to help businesses create better PowerPoint presentations that will engage their audiences and help them achieve their goals.

How much you can typically make: $20-$30/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Freelancer
Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour

Resource to help you learn more: 5 Guides to Make Money with Presentation Design 

#23 Voiceover Artist

If you have a pleasant voice and know how to use recording software, then you can make some extra cash being a voice-over artist. There are all sorts of things businesses need voice-overs for, from promotional videos to educational content like how-to videos. And, of course, many businesses need voice-overs for their commercials.

How much you can typically make: $10-$30/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Voices
Fiverr
Upwork

Resource to help you learn more: How to Get a Voice Over Job with No Experience

#24 Audio Transcriber 

Transcription is another great way to make money from home. And you don’t need any experience to get started. All you need is a computer, a good pair of headphones, and a reliable internet connection. Companies will pay you for this work because they use those transcriptions for things like closed captioning for their videos or to create subtitles for their international audiences.

How much you can typically make: $15-$25/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Rev
QA World
TranscribeMe 
GoTranscript 
Upwork  
Fiverr 

Resource to help you learn more: How to Make Money Transcribing in 2022: Up to $25 an Hour 

#25 Stock Photographer 

Most photographers make money by meeting with clients in person. But you can also make money by selling your photos online. Websites, like the ones below, will pay you for your photos if people buy them to be used in their own projects (e.g. marketing materials). And you don’t even need a fancy camera to get started. You can use the one on your phone!

How much you can typically make: $1-$20 per photo

Where to sell your photos:

Adobe Stock
Shutter Stock
Foap
Alamy

Resource to help you learn more: 

#26 Freelance Bookkeeper  

Are you good with numbers? Do you love organizing? If so, then you could make some serious money by working as a bookkeeper that helps businesses keep track of their finances.

You don’t need any formal qualifications to get started. All you need is some experience using accounting software like Quickbooks, which you can easily learn!

How much you can typically make: $15-$25/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Indeed
FlexJobs
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour 

Resource to help you learn more: How To Become a Bookkeeper and Make $40,000 Per Year 

#27 Website and App Tester 

If you have a knack for finding bugs and issues, then you could make money by testing websites and apps. Companies will pay you to test their websites and apps to ensure that they are functioning properly. This is an excellent online job for college students because it is relatively easy to do and does not require any experience.

How much you can typically make: $10-$15 per test

Where to find jobs: 

UserTesting 
UserLytics
IntelliZoomPanel
TryMyUI

Resource to help you learn more: How to Get Paid to Test Websites and Apps

#28 Remote Customer Service Agent

If you have good people skills, enjoy helping others, and have a reliable internet connection, you could be a remote customer service agent. Companies will pay you to provide customer service to their clients via phone, email, or chat. 

How much you can typically make: $5-$20/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
Freelancer
Indeed 
FlexJobs

Resource to help you learn more: How to Get an At-Home Customer Service Job 

#29 Data Entry Clerk

As the world becomes more data-driven, businesses will only need more people to help organize and input all of that information. If you’re fast and accurate with a computer keyboard, a data entry clerk might be the online job for you! It won’t be the most exhilarating online job, but a data entry job is a great way to make some extra money from home.

How much you can typically make: $8-$15/hour

Where to find jobs:

Upwork
Fiverr 
PeoplePerHour 
FlexJobs
Freelancer

Resource to help you learn more: How to Find Legit Online Data Entry Work from Home

#30 Freelance Computer Programmer / Developer 

Do you have experience coding? If so, you could potentially make good money as a computer programmer that helps companies create and maintain software applications. As you can imagine, there are thousands of companies out there that rely on software to run their businesses. 

So, the amount of jobs available is endless. And because of that demand, you can easily charge a high rate and make $500+ a month by working a few hours each week!

How much you can typically make: $50-$100/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
Freelancer
FlexJobs
LinkedIn

Resource to help you learn more: 13 Steps to Start & Thrive as a Freelance Programmer 

#31 Online Course Creator 

You may not think of yourself as a teacher, but if you know a specific area that others want to learn about, you can create an online course and earn money from it! And your course can be on just about anything. Seriously! Look on any course platform and you’ll find courses on everything from cooking to app development to creative writing.

The great thing about online courses is that once you create the course and put it out there, it has the potential to keep making you money for months or even years down the road. Of course, that only happens if your course is high quality and provides value to your students. But if you can create a course that does those things and market it to the right people, you could find yourself with a nice little passive income!

How much you can typically make: Depends on the course and profit margin 

Resource to help you learn more: 10 Steps To Creating A Wildly Successful Online Course 

#32 T-Shirt and Merchandise Designer

Ever dream of having your own clothing line? Well, now’s your chance (sort of). You can design and sell your own merchandise (e.g. T-shirts, tote bags, phone cases) without having to invest in any inventory. All you need is a design, and sites like Teespring will take care of the rest, including printing, shipping, and customer service.

How much you can typically make: Depends on the product margin

Where to design your merchandise: 

Teespring
Printful 

Resource to help you learn more:

#33 Product Tester 

If you love trying new products and giving your opinion, then this job is perfect for you! As a product tester, you would be responsible for testing out new products and giving feedback to the company about your experience. Companies use your feedback to improve their products and make changes before they release them to the public. 

This job is a great online job for college students because you can do it on your own schedule and it doesn’t require any special skills or qualifications.

How much you can typically make: $3-$500 per month

Where to find jobs: 

Toluna
Product Report Card
Swagbucks Discover

Resource to help you learn more: Product Tester: How to Get Paid to Test Products at Home

#34 Amazon Seller

If you’re a college student with an entrepreneurial spirit, then selling on Amazon could be the perfect online job for you! As an Amazon seller, you can sell just about anything on the platform.

To get started, you need to create a seller account and list your products. Once your products are live, you’ll need to manage customer inquiries, orders, and shipping. Amazon takes a cut of every sale that you make, but you can still earn a decent profit margin if you price your products correctly.

How much you can typically make: Depends on the product margin of what you sell

Resource to help you learn more: Beginner’s Guide: How to Sell on Amazon

#35 Etsy Seller

Similar to Amazon, Etsy is a marketplace where you can sell physical products. However, Etsy specializes in handmade or vintage items, arts and crafts, and unique gifts. This makes it a great platform for selling handmade, one-of-a-kind gifts.

To get started, you’ll need to create an Etsy account and set up your shop. Then, you can start listing products for sale. You’ll need to take quality photos, write compelling product descriptions, and price your products competitively. Etsy also takes a cut of every sale, so you’ll need to factor that into your pricing.

How much you can typically make: Depends on the product margin of what you sell

Resource to help you learn more:

#36 Gamer 

Video games aren’t just for entertainment anymore — you can actually get paid to play them! As a gamer, you can make money in a variety of ways. For example, you can make money from other people watching you play by creating walkthrough YouTube videos or streaming your gameplay on Twitch. You can also work as a game tester and test new games before they are released to the public.

How much you can typically make: $15-$100 per month

Where to find jobs: 

MistPlay
Skillz Games
Inbox Dollars

Resource to help you learn more: Make Money Gaming! How To Make Money Playing Video Games 2022 

#37 Freelance Consultant

As a college student, you may not think you can be a consultant. But you probably have a lot of knowledge and skills that businesses would be willing to pay for! 

For example, let’s say you know how to use social media to reach a target audience but don’t want to be a social media manager. As a freelance consultant, you can offer your services to advise businesses on their social media strategy.

How much you can typically make: $30-$45/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour
Freelance

Resource to help you learn more: What Is a Freelance Consultant and How to Become One

#38 Freelance Market Researcher

Market research is a vital part of any business, so this job can be very interesting and rewarding. As a market researcher, you would be responsible for conducting online surveys, researching market trends, and collecting data about people’s opinions and behaviors. 

This data would be used to help businesses make better decisions about their products and marketing campaigns. It’s also a great skill that’s transferable to any industry or field when you get a job after graduating!

How much you can typically make: $5-$30/hour

Where to find jobs: 

Upwork
Indeed
FlexJobs
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour 

Resource to help you learn more:

#39 Dropshipper 

This last online job is pretty popular. But it’s also one of the most challenging to get right! Dropshipping is a type of eCommerce business where you sell products manufactured and shipped by someone else.

The biggest challenges with dropshipping involve selecting the right products to sell, managing the shipping logistics, and building a website that converts visitors into buyers. But if you’re up for the challenge, dropshipping can be an incredibly lucrative online job!

How much you can typically make: Depends on the product margin of what you sell

Resource to help you learn more: How to Start a Dropshipping Business: A Complete Playbook for 2022 

FAQs on Side Hustles and Online Jobs for College Students 
Is making money from online jobs easy? 

Making money online requires effort, dedication, and consistency! So, no, it’s not “easy”. However, some of the online jobs we’ve shared are easier than others. And, if you’re willing to do the work, you can make money easily.

Which online job is best for college students? 

The best online job for you will depend on your skill set, interests, and schedule. For example, if you’re a great writer, you could be a freelance content writer. If you’re good at social media, you could be a social media consultant. And if you’re great at customer service, you could be a remote customer service agent. It all depends on you!

How much time do I have to spend working online to make decent money? 

You can make as little or as much money as you want with online jobs. It depends on how much time and effort you’re willing to put in. For some online jobs, you can set your own hours so the work can be done in your spare time, while others may require more commitment and a set schedule.

How do I get paid online?

Most online jobs will require you to get paid through a digital payment platform like PayPal. However, some online jobs will pay you via direct deposit into your bank account. 

We recommend putting any money you don’t need right away in a high-yield savings account or an investment account. That way, the money you earn from your side hustle can build over time without you needing to do anything! 

Where can I learn the skills to make money from online jobs? 

If you’re not sure where to start, there are plenty of online courses and tutorials that can teach you the basics of making money online and the skillset to do any of the jobs on this list. You can look for courses using online learning platforms, like Coursera, Udemy, or Skillshare. 

How can you land your first online job if you don’t have experience? 

We’re sure you know the paradox of experience. You need experience to get a job, but how do you get experience if you don’t have a job? It’s tough, but not impossible! 

For example, as a freelancer, you can start working on smaller projects for free until you build a portfolio and reputation to land bigger clients. You can also check out this awesome guide on how to get freelance work with no experience for more tips!

How can you manage your time for a side hustle while you’re in college? 

You probably already have a lot on your plate as a college student. So, how do you add a side hustle into the mix without slacking off in your college classes? Time management is key! You’ll need to create a schedule and figure out what works best for you. 

For some people, that means working on their side hustle in the morning before classes. For others, it may be working on it in the evening or on weekends. The important thing is to figure out what works for you and stick to it!

How do you file taxes for your side hustle?

It may be scary or confusing to think about filing taxes as a college student. But it’s actually not that complicated. 

The most important thing you’ll need to remember is to save some of the money you make for taxes. Why? Because taxes won’t be taken directly from your earnings like they would from a paycheck from a traditional job. Experts recommend saving 25-30% of your side hustle income to account for taxes.

There are a few other things to keep in mind when you’re filing taxes for your side hustle. To learn more, check out this helpful article on how to handle taxes on side hustle income.

Final Thoughts 

College is expensive, and many students are looking for ways to make extra money. If you’re one of them, we hope this guide has given you all the information you need to find the online job that helps you achieve that goal! 

And if you’re looking for more ways to make and save money while in college, check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics like how to build credit fast as a beginner and how to start an emergency fund. 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
You know what they say about money? You can never have enough. But… you can have too little – especially if you face some unexpected situation, like losing your job during a recession, and you don’t have an emergency fund!

Source

Unfortunately, that’s the reality for a lot of people. According to a 2022 report from Bankrate, less than half of Americans have enough money saved to cover an unexpected expense of $1,000. And, in our current economic downturn, that’s quite risky… 

That’s why, in this guide, we want to show you how to start building an emergency fund. Our goal is to help you become financially prepared to get through any unexpected expense with less anxiety and without the need to go into crippling debt. 

Specifically, we’ll discuss:

What an emergency fund is
Why it’s important for young adults to have savings for emergencies
How much money should be in your emergency fund
3 easy steps to build an emergency fund for the first time

Let’s get started!

What Is an Emergency Fund?

An emergency fund is a savings account that you set aside for unexpected expenses, like a job loss, medical emergency, or car repairs.

For example, let’s say you unexpectedly lose your job. If you’re living paycheck to paycheck,  you may have to put your rent or mortgage on a credit card, which would start accruing interest immediately. But if you have an emergency fund, you can cover your living expenses until you find a new job.

Why Is It Important for Young Adults to Have an Emergency Fund? 

It’s important to have an emergency fund because it can help you avoid going into debt if you have a financial emergency. This is especially important during a recession when many people are out of work and struggling to make ends meet.

Having an emergency fund can also give you peace of mind as you enter adulthood. If you know you have some savings to fall back on, it can help reduce stress and anxiety about money. It can also help you avoid things like having to accept a horrible job just to pay the bills, go into credit card debt, or take out high-interest loans.

Here’s a great video from the Two Cents YouTube channel that drives home the point of why it’s important to have an emergency fund: 

How Much Money Should You Have in an Emergency Fund?

The amount of money you should have in your emergency fund depends on your circumstances. Most experts recommend that you have three to six months’ worth of living expenses saved up. Your major living expenses include things like:

Rent/Mortgage
Groceries
Insurance 
Healthcare
Utilities
Transportation

Three to six months of savings may seem like a lot — especially if you’re already strapped for cash. But remember that you can start small and build up your emergency fund over time.

If you are just starting, aim to save $500 to $1000 in your emergency fund over the next few months. Once you have reached this goal, you can start working on saving up three to six months’ worth of your living expenses.

3 Easy Steps to Build an Emergency Fund
Step 1 – Determine a realistic goal for your emergency fund

Start by looking at your monthly expenses and determining how much money you would need to cover these costs if you were to lose your job or have another emergency. Remember: your goal is to save at least three to six months’ worth of your living expenses.

Once you have a number in mind, you can start working on a budget and savings plan to reach this goal. For example, let’s say you realize that to have a three-month emergency fund will need to have at least $10,000. 

How much would you need to deposit into your emergency each month to reach that goal in 12 months? What expenses can you cut back on to make reaching that goal more realistic? 

Step 2 – Open a high-yield savings account

Now that you know how much you need to save for your emergency fund, it’s time to open a savings account specifically for this purpose. Why not just use a bank account you already have? Because you’ll be too easily tempted to spend that money on something else. You’ll be more likely to leave your emergency fund for emergencies only if you just put the money in a separate savings account. 

The best savings account for this purpose will be a high-yield savings account that has no or low fees and offers a competitive interest rate. That way, your emergency fund will not only be easily accessible when you need it, but it will also grow over time.

To easily find and compare the best high-yield savings accounts, use this comparison tool from Fiona. Then select and open an online account that gives you the best offer. All of this can be done as soon as today!

Step 3 – Set up automatic deposits to your new savings account

Now that you have a savings account for your emergency fund, it’s time to start saving! The best way to do this is to set up automatic deposits from your checking account to your new savings account. This way, you’ll never even see the money in your checking account and you’ll be less tempted to spend it on something else.

To do this, all you need to do is log into your online checking account and set up an automatic monthly transfer to your new savings account. Ideally, you’ll set up transfers equal to the monthly savings goal you determined in step 1.

But, if that’s not possible for you right now, don’t worry. Set up deposits for whatever you can afford right now. Then, gradually increase that amount whenever you can. Every little bit counts!

Key Takeaways

An emergency fund is a crucial part of your financial security. When you have one, you can cover unexpected expenses without having to rely on credit cards or loans.

Ideally, you’ll save enough money to cover at least three to six months of living expenses. But, if that’s not possible right now, don’t worry. Just start with what you can afford and gradually increase your savings over time.

The best type of savings account for your emergency fund is a high-yield savings account. With this type of account, you’ll earn interest on your savings, which can help your emergency fund grow even faster. Click here to quickly find and open a high-yield savings account!

And if you’re looking for more tips to make and save money as a young adult, check out the rest of our blog. There we regularly share tips on topics like how to make an extra $500 a month and ways to save money in college!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
How bad is the student loan debt crisis? Pretty bad… In 2022, there’s over $1.7 trillion in outstanding student loan debt!

But what does that number actually mean? How does it affect student loan borrowers? And what other student loan debt statistics and facts should you know in 2022?

Those are all important questions – especially if you’ll soon need to take out a student loan or begin paying off your student loan debt!  

To help you out, in this blog post, we’ll share the most important facts and figures that reflect topics like:

How many people currently have student loan debt
Who is borrowing the most student loans to pay for college
How much student loan debt the average college graduate has
How students are repaying their student loans 
How long does it take the average person to repay their student debt
Who can expect to benefit from student loan forgiveness programs
And more

Let’s get started! 

Student Loan Debt Statistics and Facts

There are hundreds of student loan debt statistics we could share. But here are the most important facts and statistics for you to know about right now.

#1 How much student loan debt is there in the United States?  

As we mentioned in the intro, as of June 2022, there is over $1.7 trillion in student loan debt in the United States. 

#2 What type of student loan debt do most borrowers have? 

According to MeasureOne’s 2021 Private Student Loan Report, 92.29% of that debt comes from federal student loans. The other 7.71% comes from private student loans. 

#3 What is the average student loan debt balance in America?

For borrowers of federal student loans, the average student loan debt is $37,014 per borrower. When you factor in private student loans, the average student loan debt goes up to around $40,904 per borrower.

#4 How many American adults have student loan debt? 

43.4 million American adults have federal student loan debt. This means around 1 in 8 Americans currently have student debt. 

#5 Which age group has the most student loan debt? 

According to the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Federal Student Aid, borrowers between the ages of 25-34 had the most number of borrowers with student loan debt as of December 2021. Borrowers in this age bracket owe approximately $493.63 billion in federal student loans. 

Although there are slightly fewer borrowers between the ages of 35-49, borrowers in that age bracket owe even more money. Their outstanding federal student loan debt balance sits at around $622.91 billion. 

#6 What is the average student loan debt for community college?

According to Community College Review, the average student loan debt balance for graduates of public community colleges is approximately $11,112. For graduates of private community colleges, the average balance is approximately $17,343.

#7 What percentage of college students graduate debt free?

Among recent college students, only around 30% graduate without student loan debt. And, according to Best College Reviews, 1 in 3 of those students doesn’t come from a high-income background. 

How’s that possible? Mostly, scholarships and financial aid! Take a look at   The Secret to Paying $0 for College and Graduating Debt Free to learn more!

Student Loan Repayment Statistics and Facts

If you’re a borrower of federal student loans, then you’ve likely been enjoying the national pause on federal student loan payments. But that probably isn’t gonna last forever. Here are some facts and figures on how students and graduates repay their student loans. 

#8 When is the national pause on student loan payments set to end?

The official end date for the national pause on student loans has been extended a few times. But, currently, the pause is set to end on September 1, 2022. 

#9 How much is the average monthly student loan payment? 

The average student loan payment is $460 a month.  

#10 How long does it take the average borrower to repay their student loans? 

The average borrower takes 20 years to pay off their student loan debt. 

#11 What’s the best federal student loan repayment plan for people who want to pay off debt fast?

The Standard Repayment Plan is the best student loan repayment plan if you want to pay off your student loans as fast as possible. With this repayment plan, you’ll have a fixed monthly payment that ensures you pay off your loan in at least 10 years.

#12 What’s the best federal student loan repayment plan for people with low income?

For people with low income, the best student loan repayment plan will be one of the income-driven repayment plans. These plans include the Income-Based Repayment Plan, the Income-Contingent Repayment Plan, the Pay as You Earn Repayment Plan, and the Revised Pay as You Earn Repayment Plan. 

#13 What happens if you can’t pay back your student loans?

If you don’t pay your student loans, you will go into student loan default. This can have several negative consequences, including wage garnishment, damage to your credit score, and difficulty securing a loan in the future. 

But you do have the option to apply for forbearance or deferment, depending on your circumstances. Either option will pause your monthly payments for no more than 12 months at a time for forbearance and up to 3 years for deferment. With forbearance, your loans will continue to collect interest, which means your balance will continue to rise until you start paying it off. 

#14 Are there any scholarships that help with paying off student loans?

Yes, there are some scholarships that help with paying off student loans. We even have one at Scholly worth $25,000 if you win! Here’s a link to apply. 

#15 Do private student loans have repayment plans?

Yes, but they’re not like the federal student loan repayment plans. You’ll have to contact your lender to see what repayment plans they offer for private student loans.

Student Loan Forgiveness Statistics and Facts

If you have student loan debt, we know you’re probably curious about any federal initiatives to forgive or cancel student loan debt. Here are a few of the key facts and figures to know in 2022. 

#16 How much student loan debt has been forgiven under the Biden administration?

So far, the Biden administration has canceled around $25 billion in student loan debt. Unfortunately, this is still only a small fraction of the overall student loan debt.

Read more about how President Joe Biden’s administration has addressed student loan debt so far. 

#17 Will Biden ever cancel all student loan debt?

No one knows for sure. But it doesn’t look like Biden will cancel all student loan debt. However, there is a chance he’ll cancel $10,000 of student debt per borrower. You may also be able to get some of your debt canceled through student loan forgiveness programs.

#18 What is student loan forgiveness?

Student loan forgiveness is when a borrower is no longer responsible for repaying their student loans. There are a few different ways that you can have your student loans forgiven. 

One way is by enrolling in an income-driven repayment plan. With one of these repayment plans, the federal government will forgive all or part of your student loan debt if you make on-time payments for a certain number of years. 

Another way to have your student loans forgiven is through the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program. This program forgives student loan debt for borrowers who work full-time in qualifying public service jobs. 

Lastly, there are several student loan forgiveness programs offered by private organizations. These programs typically forgive student loan debt for borrowers who work in specific fields, such as nursing or law.

Read more about your options for student loan forgiveness programs. 

#19 What were the recent changes to the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program?

You may have heard that recently the Biden administration made some changes to the PSLF program. These changes include: 

Expanding the eligibility criteria to include more types of loans and borrowers
Making it easier for borrowers to get their loans forgiven
Increasing the amount of money that can be forgiven

You can find more information by clicking the link above on student loan forgiveness programs.

#20 What is the “student loan forgiveness tax bomb”?

The student loan forgiveness tax bomb is when your forgiven student loans are considered taxable income by the IRS. This means that you could end up owing a lot of money in taxes on your forgiven student loans. However, there is some hope that the tax bomb issue will be fixed soon. 

#21 Are there private student loan forgiveness programs? 

Unfortunately, private student loan forgiveness programs don’t exist. If you’re having trouble paying off your private student loans, consider student loan refinancing, which could lead to more manageable repayment terms and lower monthly payments. 

Final Thoughts 

The student loan debt crisis is a major issue facing Americans today. And, unfortunately, it doesn’t look like it’s going away anytime soon. 

We hope the student loan debt statistics and facts we shared in this blog post help you make more informed decisions about taking out and paying off student loans. 

And, if you want more college finance tips, be sure to check out the rest of our blog where we discuss topics like how to apply for FAFSA, whether now is a good time to invest in the stock market, and how to win college scholarships!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
You don’t need to be an investing pro to see it. Recently, the stock market has been struggling hard. People have lost a lot of money as a result. And it doesn’t look like things are gonna change anytime soon.

Now, to the real investing pros, this is all normal. But, as someone in college who’s new to investing, you may be wondering…

Is now a good time to invest in the stock market? 

Well, if you only focus on how much money people are losing, the answer would probably be ‘No’. 

BUT… the truth is that right now is actually one of the best times for you to start investing. And, in this blog post, we’re going to show you why! Here’s what we’ll cover:

Some common fears you may have about investing (and why they’re generally wrong)
Why the best time to start investing was… yesterday
An investing tool you can use to make your first investments ASAP 

Disclaimer: Now, it’s important you know the information we’ll share here is meant to be educational only. It should not be taken as financial advice. For that, you’ll need to speak to a professional financial advisor. Our blog posts may also contain affiliate links that, at no cost to you, may earn us a small commission.

Reasons You May Be Scared to Start Investing Right Now

Your fears are valid. If we didn’t know any better, we’d also procrastinate on investing for one of the following reasons. 

You think investing is only for the rich

If you’re worried about having enough money to invest, don’t be. Thanks to many investment apps, you can start investing with as little as $1 a month. So, no, you don’t have to be rich to invest. In fact, investing is one of the best ways for people of all income levels to build wealth over time.

You don’t know what to invest in

Bitcoin? Stocks? Bonds? There are a lot of options and advice out there, making it tough to know where to start. But the good news is you don’t have to pick just one thing. You can (and should) diversify your portfolio by investing in a mix of assets.

You’re worried about losing all your money

The stock market has indeed been pretty volatile lately, resulting in a lot of people losing the money they invested. But if you’re investing for the long-term (which is what you should be doing if you’re in college), the current volatility of the stock market shouldn’t concern you too much. Why? Because, in a somewhat predictable cycle, the market will eventually stabilize and be on the rise once again. 

The Best Time to Start Investing Was Yesterday

Well… sort of. The truth is that there’s no perfect time. But here’s why right now is a pretty good time to start investing.

Declining markets mean cheaper stocks

Whenever the market tanks, it presents an opportunity to buy stocks on the cheap. That’s because when stock prices go down, you can buy more shares for your money. And as long as you’re investing for the long-term, you have time for the market to rebound and your investment to grow.

Time is your best investment strategy

The current conditions of the stock market won’t last forever.  The market will eventually rebound. And, when it does, you’ll see why now is better than later. Plus, the sooner you start investing, the more time your money has to grow. And the longer you wait to invest, the more you risk missing out on potential returns.

The current dip in the stock market is normal

It’s normal for the stock market to go up and down. In fact, it’s healthy for the market to have these dips. They provide opportunities for long-term investors, like you, to buy more shares at a lower price. And over time, these dips even out.

The market tends to reward risk takers

You may lose some money in the short term if you start investing today. But remember, the stock market is a long-term game. And, historically, it has rewarded those who are willing to take on some risk now for potential payouts later. 

How to Start Investing as College Student

There are so many options these days for you to start investing as a beginner. For example, you can open up an online brokerage account and start trading stocks. This is a good option if you’re knowledgeable about investing and want to have full control over your investment strategy.

Another option could be to use an automatic investment tool called a robo-advisor. What’s that? A robo-advisor is a digital tool that uses algorithms to automatically invest your money for you based on your goals.

This option is great if you’re starting with a small amount of money and don’t want to have to worry about picking individual stocks or following market trends. All you have to do is:

Set up an account
Answer some questions about your financial goals
Decide how much and how often you want to invest
Sit back and let the robo-advisor do its thing

Then, the robo-advisor uses its algorithms to automatically invest your money in a portfolio of stocks and bonds that aligns with your goals. 

For example, let’s say you want to take an aggressive, long-term investment strategy to potentially earn a lot of money on your investments. Well, the robo-advisor will automatically invest your money in a portfolio that is heavier on stocks (for growth) and lighter on bonds (for stability). It will also make sure your portfolio remains balanced as the market experiences the natural ups and downs over time. 

Generally, robo-advisors are a great way to get started with investing without having to put in a lot of time, effort, or money. Of course, you’ll have to pay to use a robo-advisor. But, we recommend checking out SoFi’s automated investing tool which lets you start investing with as little as $1 and zero management fees.

Final Thoughts

If you’re thinking about investing in the stock market, don’t let recent volatility scare you off! Right now is actually one of the best times for you to start investing.

Stock prices are relatively cheap and there are tools that can set you up to auto-invest so. By taking this approach, you won’t even need to follow the stock market closely if you don’t want to! Plus, if you wait until the stock market is “just right,” you might miss out on a lot of money in the long run. So, consider getting started ASAP! 

And if you want more beginner finance tips, check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics like how to build credit fast!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Winning a scholarship is a fantastic feeling! We mean… who doesn’t like to be officially rewarded for their hard work, win free money, and avoid some annoying post-college debt?

So, if you’ve just received an email or phone call about winning a scholarship, congratulations! But what are you supposed to do now? How do you make sure the money goes to the right place? 

Good questions – because there are a few required steps that all scholarship winners must take. And this post is gonna walk you through each one so you can access your scholarship funds and get back to celebrating (or applying for more scholarships) as quickly as possible! 

Step 1: Officially Accept the Scholarship

Yea, you received the email saying you won the scholarship. But it’s not really yours until you accept it! And you have to do that before the deadline. So, don’t forget! 

Once you’ve read the email, either accept the scholarship right then or set a reminder to do it ASAP. The last thing you want is to miss the deadline and get passed over for a runner-up. 

Step 2: Confirm College and Payment Information

Now that you’ve officially accepted the scholarship, the next thing you need to do is inform Scholly where to send the money. To do that, you’ll need to confirm your payment information and where you go/will go to college. 

You’ll need to provide information such as:

Which college you have decided to attend
The address of your college
Your student ID number
A copy of your student bill
Proof of enrollment (acceptance letter, enrollment statement, or your class schedule). 

To finalize and process payment of your scholarship, you’ll also need to share some basic tax information by completing a W9 form since scholarships are taxable by US law. To read more about why a W9 is required, check out this quick article from H&R Block.  

You’ll receive your W-9 via a secure Docusign from Scholly. And, when you do, you’ll see that you’ll be asked to fill out the following information: 

Name
Address
Select ‘Individual’
Social Security Number
Sign
Date

Now, we know your social security number is sensitive information to share. So, we want to assure you that we take every precaution in making sure your information is safe and secure. 

Once we receive the completed Docusign, we’ll send you your scholarship money by check. You can expect to receive it in the mail within 10 business days of completion.

Step 3: Report the Scholarship to Your College

You won the scholarship to pay for school. So, your college needs to know about it! That means your next step is to contact your college’s financial aid office to let them know how much money you won. Be sure to also ask them how your scholarship may affect your financial aid package. 

Step 4: Tell Us Your Story 

This last step isn’t required of all scholarship winners. But it is a great opportunity for you to receive even more recognition for your hard work and give advice to future students! 

If we contact you for an interview, we’ll ask to set up a short Zoom call to discuss topics like: 

Your personal background 
Your academic goals and achievements 
Your extracurricular activities and passions
How you’ll use the scholarship (if it’s not specifically meant for tuition) 
What you want to study, your potential career aspirations, and plans for the future

We may also ask for a photo and a quick bio so we can feature you as a scholarship winner on our website. 

Again, congrats on winning a scholarship! It’s a big achievement that you should be proud of. You’re doing what it takes to make your college education more affordable. And we know that your hard work is gonna benefit you throughout your time in college and beyond! 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Are you on a tight budget? Do you already know that when the national pause on student loan payments ends you’ll be faced with monthly payments you can’t afford? Want a solution that leads to affordable payments and potentially even student loan forgiveness?

Well, then you’ll probably want to enroll in one of the income-driven repayment plans! These repayment plans are available to all federal student loan borrowers and base the amount of your monthly payments on your income level.

In other words, if you’re not making enough at work to afford paying hundreds of dollars every month toward your student loan balance, then you don’t have to. On an income-driven repayment plan, your monthly payment could be as low as $0 a month!

Does this sound like the type of repayment plan you need? If so, in this blog post, we’re gonna help you:

Evaluate the pros and cons of income-driven repayment plans
Understand the differences between the 4 income-driven repayment plans and how to choose the best one for you
Learn how to easily apply for an income-driven repayment plan

Let’s get started by discussing a bit more about what makes income-driven repayment plans different from other student loan repayment plans!

What Is an Income-Driven Repayment Plan?

An income-driven repayment plan is a student loan repayment option for borrowers of federal student loans. Typically, these income-driven plans are for student loan borrowers who can’t afford to make fixed payments based solely on the amount of their outstanding student loan balance.

With an income-driven repayment plan, your monthly student loan payments will be capped somewhere between 10-20% of your discretionary income — depending on which repayment plan you choose.

What is discretionary income?

Discretionary income is the amount of income you have left after you pay for necessary expenses, like rent, food, and taxes.

Who is eligible for income-driven repayment plans?

All federal student loan borrowers are eligible for income-driven repayment plans, regardless of when you took out your loans.

Borrowers of private student loans are not eligible for the income-driven repayment plans that we discuss in this blog post. If your private student loan payments are currently too high for your budget, you’ll need to speak with your private lender to discuss repayment options. You may also consider refinancing your student loans.

How much will you pay on an income-driven repayment plan?

As mentioned earlier, with an income-driven repayment plan, the amount of your monthly student loan payments depends on your discretionary income and family size.

You can use the Department of Education’s Loan Simulator to calculate how much your monthly payment could be. But, if you’re on a tight budget, you can expect to pay between $0 and $300 per month on an income-driven repayment plan.

Pros and Cons of Income-Driven Repayment Plans

Income-driven repayment plans can be a great option for many borrowers of federal student loans. But that doesn’t mean they’re the right choice for everyone.

Here are the major pros and cons of income-driven repayment plans to help you decide if choosing one of these repayment plans is the right move for you.

Pros of income-driven repayment plans
Your monthly payment is based on your income, family size, and loan balance so you can afford to pay what you owe. That means your monthly payment could be as low as $0/month.
You’ll be less likely to make late payments and risk student loan default since you’ll be able to make affordable payments.
Your student loan balance is forgiven after 20-25 years of regular payments.
Cons of income-driven repayment plans
You may end up paying more interest on your student loan in the long run.
You may have to pay income tax on the amount of debt that is forgiven at the end of your repayment period.
If you’re married, your spouse’s income will get factored into how much you need to pay monthly.
Your monthly payment can still be more than you can afford, so it’s important to make sure you choose the right plan for your financial situation.
Overview of the 4 Income-Driven Repayment Plans

The Department of Federal Student Aid currently offers federal student loan borrowers the option to choose one of four income-driven repayment plans:

Income-Based Repayment (IBR)
Revised Pay As You Earn (REPAYE)
Pay As You Earn (PAYE)
Income-Contingent Repayment (ICR)

Each plan has different eligibility requirements, terms, and conditions. So, let’s look at the specific details of each one to help you begin considering which plan may be best for you.

Income-Based Repayment (IBR)

Under this repayment plan, your monthly payment would be 10% of your discretionary income if you borrowed on or after July 1, 2014, or 15% if you borrowed before then. Your monthly payment would also never be more than what you would pay with the Standard Repayment Plan.

With the Income-Based Repayment Plan, you’ll qualify for student loan forgiveness after 20-25 years of regular payments.

The IBR Plan is only available for borrowers with:
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans (from the FFEL Program)
Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans (from the FFEL Program)
FFEL PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
FFEL Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Revised Pay As You Earn (REPAYE)

Under the REPAYE Repayment Plan, your monthly payment would be 10% of your monthly discretionary income. 

The repayment period for the REPAYE Repayment Plan is 20 years for undergraduate student loans and 25 years for graduate student loans. At the end of that repayment period, your remaining loan balance becomes eligible for student loan forgiveness.

The REPAYE Plan is only available for borrowers with:
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Pay As You Earn (PAYE)

The Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Repayment Plan is almost the same as the REPAYE Repayment Plan.

The PAYE Repayment Plan caps your monthly student loan payment at 10% of your discretionary income. However, this income-driven repayment plan is only available to borrowers who have demonstrated they can’t afford to make monthly payments under the Standard Repayment Plan.

The repayment period for the PAYE Repayment Plan is 20 years. At the end of that repayment period, your remaining loan balance becomes eligible for student loan forgiveness.

The PAYE Repayment Plan is only available for borrowers with:
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Income-Contingent Repayment (ICR)

The Income-Contingent Repayment caps your monthly payment amount at whichever of the following two options is less:

20% of your discretionary income
The amount of a fixed payment over 12 years, adjusted according to your income.

The repayment period for the Income-Contingent Repayment Plan is 25 years. At the end of that repayment period, the remaining balance becomes eligible for student loan forgiveness.

The ICR Plan is only available for borrowers with:
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Direct Consolidation Loans that repaid PLUS loans made to parents
Note on Student Loan Forgiveness from Income-Driven Repayment Plans

Your federal student loan balance is forgiven if you haven’t fully repaid your loans at the end of the loan repayment period for all four income-driven repayment plans. 

But, as we mentioned earlier in the pros and cons section, you may still need to pay tax on that forgiven debt. Currently, there is a rule that any student loan debt that is forgiven after 2025 is counted as taxable income. If your forgiven balance is high, the tax you’ll owe could be a lot more than you were expecting. 

Some potentially good news: Congress is working on legislation to eliminate income tax on forgiven student loans, but it’s not in place yet.

How to Apply for an Income-Driven Repayment Plan

To apply for an income-driven repayment plan, you’ll need to submit an application to the Department of Education’s Federal Student Aid office.

When completing your application, you’ll need to have the following materials:

Your Social Security number
Your driver’s license number
The total amount you borrowed in student loans
The name of the school(s) you attended using your loans
The dates you attended school
Proof of your current income
Information about your spouse’s income, if applicable
What to do after applying

To remain eligible for income-driven repayment plans, you’ll need to recertify your income every year. So, after applying for and getting approved, set a reminder on your calendar to do this. If your income changes or you no longer meet the eligibility requirements for your current income-driven repayment plan, you can switch to a different plan.

Final Thoughts

Income-driven repayment plans are a great way to make your student loan payments more affordable. But each plan has its own eligibility requirements, pros, and cons. So, it’s important to do your research and make sure you choose the repayment plan that’s best for you. We hope the information we’ve shared in this blog post helps you do exactly that.

You can also save yourself a ton of time by signing up for Scholly PayOff! What’s that? It’s our way of helping you find and enroll in the best income-driven repayment plan to lower your monthly student loan payments. With PayOff, you can get your application approved in as little as 10 days – 4x faster than the traditional enrollment process we described above! 

You can also learn more about how to pay off your student loans by checking out the following resources:

What Happens If You Don’t Pay Your Student Loans
How to Pay Off Your Student Loans Fast
How to Apply for Student Loan Forgiveness Programs
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Make no mistake about it. The student loan debt crisis has been out of control for a long time. So, if you are one of the 42 million Americans who have student loan debt, you’re understandably watching what President Biden is doing to address this issue. 

During his first day in office, President Joe Biden signed an executive order to extend the pause on federal student loan payments to September 30, 2021 (Update: the pause on payments is now extended through August 2022). But you probably also remember that, during the campaign trail, the idea of canceling or forgiving student loan debt came up once or twice (read: a whole lot).

So, where do those plans for student loan debt relief stand now that Biden is in office and the pause on payments has been extended again? Should you keep making payments on your student loans?  

Well, there are no definitive answers just yet. But, in this post, we’re going to look at everything you need to know right now. 

Specifically, we’ll answer the questions:

What is President Joe Biden doing to address the student loan debt crisis?
Will the pause on student loans be extended again after August 2022? 
Is Joe Biden forgiving or canceling student loan debt?
Does Joe Biden support Elizabeth Warren’s or Bernie Sanders’s student loan debt plan?
Should you keep making payments on your student loans or wait?
What is President Joe Biden doing to address the student loan debt crisis?

Administrative forbearance are the words to know. And they have been since March 2020 when former President Trump signed into law the CARES Act, which included several measures to help American citizens facing financial difficulties due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic. 

At the time, the pause on student loan payments was only set to last until September 2020. But in August it was extended through December. Then, in December, it got extended again through January 2021. Then Biden extended it again through September 2021 and then again through January 2022.

So, we’re sure you by now you have at least some idea of what administrative forbearance means. But, since Biden’s executive order just extended forbearance again through August 2022, let’s do a quick refresh. 

With all federal student loans in administrative forbearance, that means: 

You don’t need to make any payments on your federal student loans owned by the Department of Education
Your balance won’t go up because, for the time being, there’s a 0% interest rate on your federal student loans
None of this applies to private student loans

Now, having your student loans in administrative forbearance is great for taking those monthly payments off your list of things to worry about. The only problem: it’s a temporary solution.

Is it likely that the pause on student loans will be extended again?

Honestly, no one knows. At least not right now. 

Recently, Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, responded to a Fox News reporter’s question about whether borrowers should expect to have to make payments anytime soon.

Her answer: maybe. At least, that’s the gist of her answer. You can watch what Psaki really says in this clip.

FOX NEWS: Do you think that if you hold student loan debt that you will ever have to make a payment during the Biden administration?

JEN PSAKI: I suspect at some time you will pic.twitter.com/z7SgVtq3iU

— Aaron Rupar (@atrupar) April 10, 2022

You see why we said no one knows if the pause on student loans will be extended again? In that clip Psaki says:

“We are going to continue to assess every month, every few months, on where things stand, both looking at COVID but also economic data and where we need to continue to help give the American people some breathing room.”

Is this good news? Sure, if you’re one of the people that wants “breathing room” so you can prepare to start making payments again once the pause on student loan payments ends. 

But you might be getting a little frustrated that it appears the Biden administration has no intention of canceling all student loan debt. 

Still, we have to acknowledge that some people have seen some or all of their student loan debt canceled. And there is still some hope that you’ll have some of yours canceled too…

Potential plans to forgive or cancel some student loan debt

Nationally, Americans owe $1.68 trillion in student loans. Does Biden plan to cancel all of that debt and bring that balance down to zero? Not likely — especially since, as VERIFY shows in the video below, Biden has never said he would do that. 

But there is hope for some student loan debt relief. According to the official Biden Plan for Education Beyond High School, the president does support:

Forgiving $10,000 of federal student loans per borrower, regardless of income
Revising the federal student loan income-based repayment plans so that: 1) borrowers making over $25,000 per year only have to make monthly payments that are 5% of their discretionary income 2) borrowers making $25,000 or less per year don’t have to make any payments on their undergraduate federal student loans and also won’t accrue any interest on those loans
Canceling federal student loans that are tuition-related for people who graduated from public colleges, historically black colleges and universities, or minority-serving institutions, and who earn less than $125,000 per year
Creating a new program that offers $10,000 of undergraduate or graduate student debt relief for every year of national or community service, up to five years
Forgiving the debt held by individuals who were deceived by the worst for-profit college or career profiteers

To date, Biden has acted on some of those initiatives. Since taking office, he has directly canceled more than $17 billion of student loan debt for more than 700,000 borrowers. 

You just might not be one of those people. Why? Because, so far, Biden has only canceled debt for people who fit certain conditions. For example, Biden has canceled:

$1.5 billion for borrowers who were taken advantage of by their academic institutions
$7 billion for 400,000+ borrowers who are permanently disabled
$1.26 billion for 100,000+ borrowers who attended ITT Technical Institute

Last year, the administration also restructured and expanded the criteria for the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program. The update to this student loan forgiveness program could soon lead to an additional cancellation of $6.2 billion in student loans for around 100,000 borrowers. 

So, is it still possible that Biden will follow through on a former campaign promise to at least forgive $10,000 of student loan debt for all people with federal student loan debt? Maybe. But nothing is for sure right now.

What is sure, though, is that some politicians don’t think Biden’s plans go far enough to help borrowers struggling with debts. Can you guess which politicians? 

What other politicians think about Biden’s plans to address the student loan debt crisis

When you hear the words “cancel student loans”, who comes to mind? For many, it’s the Democratic politicians who have helped popularize this idea. You know, people like Senator Elizabeth Warren, Senator Bernie Sanders, and Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.

So, what are some of their thoughts about Biden’s potential plans to address the student loan debt crisis? 

Democratic Senators Elizabeth Warren and Chuck Schumer have started putting pressure on Biden to forgive more than just $10,000 per borrower. These senators want Biden to use his executive powers to forgive $50,000 in federal student loan debt per borrower. 

It’s simple: When people have more money to spend, our whole economy is better off. The Biden-Harris administration can put more money in people’s pockets by using their existing legal authority to cancel student loan debt for millions of Americans.

— Elizabeth Warren (@ewarren) January 20, 2021

But, for better or worse, Biden’s already made it clear that he opposes this plan. Recently, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi has said Biden doesn’t have the power to use executive action to cancel student loan debt even if he wanted to. And without executive action, it’s pretty unlikely to happen.

Still, there is hope for the $10,000 forgiveness plan. And if that’s close to the amount you currently owe, the question “should I continue paying my student loans?” becomes all the more important. 

Should you pay off your student loans or wait for forgiveness? 

With all this talk about student loan forgiveness, it’s understandable that you might be thinking about waiting to see what happens before you make another payment. But should you? Well, it depends…

If you owe over $10,000, now is a good time to make sure you’re enrolled in the right student loan repayment plan for your financial circumstances and plan to continue paying off student loans. As we mentioned already, it’s highly unlikely that the Biden administration will cancel all of your student loan debt. 

And, if you can, it’s a good idea to take advantage of the 0% interest rate during this ongoing forbearance period. Doing so will help you pay off your student loans even faster since you’d get to make payments directly toward your principal balance. 

If, however, your student loan balance is below $10,000, then that’s a decision only you can make. You could wait and see what happens. If you do wait, just make sure you’re prepared to potentially start making payments again once the current forbearance period ends after August 2022.

Final Thoughts

With Biden in office, the student loan debt crisis is finally being addressed on the national level. But that doesn’t mean you should expect all of your student loan debt to go away. 

For now, it looks like there’s still a chance $10,000 of student loan forgiveness per borrower could happen. And things like a restructuring of income-driven repayment plans and debt relief programs for particular groups could follow. 

In the meantime, you’ll need to decide if making student loan payments during this national forbearance period makes sense for you. And if you need some extra help, be sure to check out Scholly’s 2021 Covid-19 Relief Fund.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
It’s unfortunate. But it’s unlikely that the federal government is gonna completely cancel all your student loan debt anytime soon. 

Sure, the payment freeze keeps getting extended (most recently through August 31, 2022), meaning you don’t have to make monthly payments right now. But will this last forever? Probably not. 

Source

So, before that inevitable day comes and you have to make your next payment, it’s a good idea to prepare yourself and make sure you’re enrolled in the right federal student loan repayment plan. Why? 

We’ll answer that question in just a minute. But, before that, let’s see an overview of what you can expect to learn by reading this blog post! Here’s what we’ll cover: 

An overview of each of your student loan repayment options
How to choose the best plan for your financial situation and goals
How to change your federal student loan repayment plan

Sounds good, right? Great, let’s start by going back to your first question! 

Why It’s Important to Choose the Best Repayment Plan for You

When you graduate, one of the biggest financial decisions you’ll make is how to repay your student loans. Why do we say that? A few reasons that we’re sure you’ll want to avoid because choosing the wrong repayment plan could: 

Have you making monthly payments that are completely unrealistic for your current income and financial obligations.
Cost you thousands of dollars in interest over the life of your loan.
Make you feel that, no matter how much you pay, the balance never goes down.
All of the above.

Source

So, when we say it’s important to consider which of the repayment plans is best for you, we really mean it! But we understand if the following question stops you from taking action…

Why Should I Change My Current Student Loan Repayment Plan Now?

If you’re reading this post during the ongoing pause on student loan payments, you may be wondering…

Why should I enroll in a repayment plan if loan forbearance could be extended again?

It’s a good question – especially since the Biden administration is now expected to extend the pause (again) through August 31, 2022. 

The answer? Making regular student loan payments right now is one of the best strategies to pay off your student loans as fast as possible. Why?

Because, during this pause on payments, your student loans aren’t accruing interest. And that means you get to focus entirely on paying down the principal balance (AKA the actual amount you originally agreed to borrow).

But that’s not the only reason! 

There are also income-driven repayment plans that offer student loan forgiveness after you’ve been enrolled for a set number of years. The sooner you get enrolled in an income-driven repayment plan, the sooner you can have whatever debt you’re not able to pay forgiven. 

So, how do you decide which plan is best for you? To start, let’s take a look at what each plan offers.

Overview of the 8 Federal Student Loan Repayment Plans

It can be challenging to understand why you would choose one plan over another to pay back your federal student loans. But we’ve got you covered! Here’s what you need to know about each of the 8 student loan repayment options.

Standard Repayment Plan

This is the plan that most federal student loan borrowers are on by default. If you’re on this repayment plan, you’ll make fixed monthly payments for 10 years. 

How much will you pay per month on the Standard Repayment Plan? It depends on your outstanding loan balance. If you stick with this plan for the entirety of your loan, you’ll make 120 monthly payments that will cover the cost of the loan and the interest accrued.  

For example, let’s say your outstanding student loan balance is $42,000. Well, to get a rough idea of how much you’ll pay each month, just divide that number by 120 and you’ll see it’s $350. 

Now, notice we said “rough idea” because that simple calculation doesn’t account for any additional interest you’ll need to pay (once the pause on student loan payments ends). For a more accurate estimate of your monthly payments, use this student loan payment calculator.

Eligible loans for the Standard Repayment Plan
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans
Direct Consolidation Loans
Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans
Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans
FFEL PLUS Loans
FFEL Consolidation Loans
Graduated Repayment Plan

The Graduated Repayment Plan starts with low payments and then gradually increases your monthly payment amount over time. This plan is best for borrowers who currently can’t afford the high, fixed monthly payments of the Standard Repayment Plan but expect their income to increase steadily over time.

The repayment period is between 10-30 years for the Graduated Repayment Plan, depending on your outstanding student loan debt balance. 

Eligible loans for the Graduated Repayment Plan
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans
Direct Consolidation Loans
Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans
Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans
FFEL PLUS Loans
FFEL Consolidation Loans
Extended Repayment Plan

The Extended Repayment Plan is a great option for borrowers who want the best of the Standard and Graduated Repayment Plans. This plan would allow you to spread your loan payments out over a repayment period of up to 25 years while gradually increasing the monthly payment amount.

Eligible loans for the Extended Repayment Plan
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans
Direct Consolidation Loans
Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans
Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans
FFEL PLUS Loans
FFEL Consolidation Loans
Revised Pay As You Earn (REPAYE)

The Revised Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (REPAYE) is one of the income-driven repayment plans we mentioned earlier. The REPAYE plan offers lower monthly payments than the Standard, Graduated, and Extended repayment plans. But you will end up paying more interest over the life of your loan.

How much will you pay per month with the Revised Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan? On this repayment plan, your monthly payment will be 10% of your monthly discretionary income. 

The repayment period for the REPAYE Plan is 20 years for undergraduate student loans and 25 years for graduate student loans. If you still have an outstanding loan balance after that period ends, your remaining loan balance will be forgiven.

Eligible loans for the REPAYE plan
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
What is discretionary income?

Discretionary income is the amount of income you have left each month after subtracting your mandatory expenses from your total monthly income. Mandatory expenses include things like rent, food, and transportation.

Pay As You Earn (PAYE)

The Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Repayment Plan is similar to the REPAYE Plan. But there are a few key differences.

The PAYE Repayment Plan caps your monthly student loan payment at 10% of your discretionary income with the added condition that you’ll never pay more than you would with the Standard Repayment Plan.

However, the biggest difference between the two plans is that REPAYE is available to all borrowers, regardless of income level. PAYE is not. PAYE is only available to borrowers who have demonstrated that they can’t afford monthly payments under the Standard Repayment Plan.

Under the PAYE plan, you’ll also become eligible for student loan forgiveness if you still have an outstanding balance after 20 years, regardless of whether the loans were for undergraduate or graduate study.

Eligible loans for the PAYE plan
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Income-Based Repayment (IBR)

The Income-Based Repayment Plan is another income-driven repayment plan for borrowers who are struggling to make their monthly student loan payments. This plan caps your monthly payment at 10% of your discretionary income if you borrowed on or after July 1, 2014, or 15% if you borrowed before then.

Under this plan, your monthly payment can be as low as $0 per month, depending on your income. Your payment would never be more than the amount you would pay under the Standard Repayment Plan.

The IBR plan also offers loan forgiveness after 20 years of repayment for new borrowers (on or after July 1, 2014) or after 25 years of repayment for not new borrowers (before July 1, 2014).

Eligible loans for the IBR plan
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans (from the FFEL Program)
Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans (from the FFEL Program)
FFEL PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
FFEL Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Income-Contingent Repayment (ICR)

The Income-Contingent Repayment plan is another option for borrowers who need income-driven monthly payments. This plan caps your monthly payment at whichever of the following two options is less:

20% of your discretionary income
The amount of a fixed payment over 12 years, adjusted according to your income.

This plan also offers loan forgiveness after 25 years of repayment.

Eligible loans for the ICR plan
Direct Subsidized Loans
Direct Unsubsidized Loans
Direct PLUS Loans made to graduate or professional students
Direct Consolidation Loans that did not repay any PLUS loans made to parents
Direct Consolidation Loans that repaid PLUS loans made to parents
Income-Sensitive Repayment (ISR)

The Income Sensitive Repayment plan is another plan for borrowers with low income. But it is not considered an income-driven repayment plan. Unlike the income-driven plans that base the amount of your payments on your discretionary income, the ISR plan bases the amount of your monthly payments on your annual income and loan balance.

Under the ISR plan, the repayment period is 10 years and does not lead to loan forgiveness.

This plan is also only available for borrowers with Federal Family Education Loans.

Eligible loans for the ISR plan
Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans
Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans
FFEL PLUS Loans
FFEL Consolidation Loans
Which Repayment Plan Is Best for You?

The best student loan repayment option for you will depend on your income, the size of your loan, and how quickly you want to pay off your debt. But here are some recommendations based on a few common scenarios and goals for federal student loan borrowers.

If you’re on a tight budget

The Income-Based Repayment Plan (IBR) is a good option if you have a tight budget and need a lower monthly payment. Under IBR, your monthly payment is capped at 10% or 15% (depending on when you borrowed) of your discretionary income. After 20-25 years of regular payments, any remaining balance on your loans will be forgiven.

You might also consider the Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (PAYE) if you fit the eligibility requirements. With PAYE, your student loan payments are capped at only 10% of your discretionary income and become eligible for student loan forgiveness after 20 years of qualifying payments.

If you expect your income to increase soon

If you’re not making much money right now but expect your income to increase soon, you can consider the Graduated Repayment Plan or Extended Repayment Plan. With either plan, your monthly payments will start low and gradually increase over time. 

If you want to qualify for student loan forgiveness

If you want to qualify for student loan forgiveness to have any remaining debt forgiven after a set number of years, you’ll want to choose one of the income-driven repayment plans: 

Revised Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (REPAYE)
Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (PAYE)
Income-Based Repayment Plan (IBR)
Income-Contingent Repayment Plan (ICR)

Depending on your career field, you might also be eligible for student loan forgiveness programs. For example, if you’re a public school teacher, you can apply for the Teacher Loan Forgiveness Program.

There’s also the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program which can lead to student loan forgiveness in just 10 years if you meet the eligibility requirements.

If you want to pay off your student loans fast

If you want to pay off your student loans fast, the best student loan repayment plan is the Standard Repayment Plan because it will make sure you pay off your loans in full within 10 years. 

If you want to pay the least in interest

If you want to pay the least in interest, the best student loan repayment plan is also the Standard Repayment Plan. Because this plan makes sure you pay off your loans the fastest, your loan balance has less time to accrue interest. 

What about private student loans?

Unlike federal student loans, there are no standardized student loan repayment plans for private loans. Each lender decides which repayment plans to offer borrowers. In other words, to find out what repayment plans are available for your private student loans, you’ll need to contact your lender directly.

How to Change Your Federal Student Loan Repayment Plan

Decided you’d like to change your federal student loan repayment plan now that you know how to pick the best one for you? Great! Here’s how you do it:

Find the contact info of your loan servicer. Your loan servicer is the company that handles the billing and other services for your federal student loans. You can find the name and contact information for your loan servicer on your monthly billing statement or your “Account Dashboard” on StudentAid.gov.
Contact your loan servicer. Let them know in which repayment plan you’d like to enroll. This process should always be free.
Complete and submit the paperwork. For example, if you want to enroll in one of the income-driven repayment plans, you’ll need to submit an application which you can get from your lender or the Federal Student Aid department. (You can also let us make this process wayyyy easier for you by signing up for Scholly PayOff!)

You can change your repayment plan as often as you want, but there may be limits on how often you can do so.

Final Thoughts

The pause on student loans (unfortunately) isn’t gonna last forever. So, do yourself a favor and prepare yourself to pay back your student loans using the repayment plan that makes the most sense for you. We hope the information we’ve shared in this post helps you do exactly that!

And if you want more tips and advice related to student loans check out the rest of our blog where we discuss topics like how to refinance student loans and what happens if you don’t pay your student loans.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’ve ever needed a job ASAP, spent hours filling out job applications, waited weeks to hear back, and then heard… nothing — JobGet might just become your new favorite job search app!

Why do we say that? Because JobGet is a little different from other job boards and apps you may be using. Within the app you can quickly create a resume, apply to jobs by just pressing a few buttons, and then schedule interviews with potential employers — all in one day!

But is JobGet the right job search tool for everyone? Probably not. And that’s why we’re going to go through the different pros and cons in this blog post so you can determine if it can help you find your next job.

Disclosure: our blog posts may contain affiliate links that, at no cost to you, may earn us a small commission.

What Is JobGet?

JobGet is a complete job search app that makes it quick to apply to jobs and easy to communicate with employers throughout the hiring and application process. JobGet strives to be the best and fastest job search platform available by making it simple to:

Find jobs in your local community by using the app’s advanced search features
Create a profile in around 5 minutes that can also be turned into a resume
Chat with and video call hiring managers within the app to make the entire process of finding a job more efficient for both employers and job seekers

To date, hundreds of thousands of people have used JobGet to find jobs, and over 10,000 employers have advertised job opportunities on the platform.

What Makes JobGet Different from Other Job Search Apps?

There are many job search apps for you to choose from these days. So, what makes JobGet different from the rest? Here are a few of the key pros and cons that can help you decide if JobGet is worth giving a shot as you look for your next job.

Pros
Instant chat with employers

When comparing JobGet and other job apps, the feature that stands out the most is the instant chat feature. On JobGet, employers and job seekers can send instant messages, schedule meetings, and conduct video interviews.

And this feature is a big deal! Why? Because it can drastically cut down the time you spend (and often waste) while trying to find a new job. Since you can chat with employers right away, you can ask questions to determine if the job will be a good fit.

Hiring managers can also reach out to you directly if they view your profile and think you’d be a good fit for an open job opportunity.

Apply to jobs with just a few clicks

JobGet can also cut down the time you spend on the application process. Creating a profile on JobGet only takes about 5 minutes (we’ll show you how soon). And, once your profile is complete, you can apply for jobs by just pressing a few buttons.

If you’ve ever uploaded your resume to a job application portal and later found out that you’d need to manually enter the same information again, you know that this feature is another really good one!

Narrow your job search to local hourly jobs

Another thing that makes JobGet different from other job apps is that it exclusively features jobs for hourly employees. Typically, if you’re looking for those types of jobs, you’d have to search through all of the available jobs on job boards, like Indeed or Craigslist.

If you’re just looking for hourly work, then JobGet makes it simple to find exactly the types of jobs you’re looking for. We’ll show you some examples of job categories on the platform in a minute.

Complete job applications entirely from your phone

Since JobGet simplifies the application process, you can pretty much do everything from your phone.

Within the JobGet app, you can search for jobs, submit applications, and then start talking directly with employers. All of this means you can shorten your job search process to just a few minutes a day.

Find other ways to make and save money

In addition to the job market listings on the app, there’s also a section called “Extra Income”. There you can find ways to:

Start working instantly with gig jobs
Earn money from home with some easy side-hustle jobs
Start investing in your future
Save money on some regular expenses
Improve your credit score
Earn cash by playing games
Cons
Still a relatively new platform

Compared to some other job apps, JobGet is still a new platform for job seekers and employers. This means that the number of jobs on the platform may be limited unless you live in one of the cities where JobGet has had the most success getting employers to post open jobs on their platform.

Only suitable for finding hourly jobs

JobGet is currently focused on helping workers looking for hourly, local jobs. So, if you’re looking for full-time positions with a fixed annual salary, JobGet may not be the best job search app for you.

What Kinds of Jobs Can You Find on JobGet?

You’re most likely to find a job on JobGet if you’re looking for an hourly job. What’s that mean? Basically, it’s any job where you get paid an hourly wage instead of a fixed annual salary.

But that doesn’t mean you can’t find a wide range of jobs on JobGet! For example, you can find:

Accounting & Finance jobs
Admin jobs
Bank jobs
Barista jobs
Caregiver jobs
Cashier jobs
Catering jobs
Creative & Design jobs
Customer service jobs
Delivery jobs
Hospitality jobs
Hotel jobs
Housekeeper jobs
Nanny jobs
Non-profit jobs
Part-time jobs
Receptionist jobs
Retail jobs
Sales jobs
Security jobs
Server jobs
Travel jobs
Truck driver jobs
Warehouse jobs
How to Find a Job on JobGet

Ready to begin job searching on JobGet? Here’s how you create an account and use this job search app to find your next job!

Step 1: Download the JobGet App

To use JobGet, you first need to download the free JobGet app. You can begin the process of downloading the app by clicking this link. JobGet is available on both the Google Play Store or the Apple App Store!

Step 2: Create a profile 

Next, you’ll need to create a profile on the app. To do that, you’ll need to fill in information about your:

Work experience (previous titles, company names, how long you worked there, an optional description of what you did)
Your highest level of education
Any certifications or licenses
Your personal bio

You’ll also be asked to upload a photo of yourself because, according to the app, applicants with photos are 70% more likely to get interviews.

After you’re done, you’ll also have the option to use their automatic resume builder. It will generate a resume using the information from your new profile. And you can use that resume to apply for jobs wherever you find them — even if they’re not on JobGet!

Step 3: Search for jobs 

Now that your profile is complete, you’re ready to start job searching! Based on your personal information, the app will automatically start recommending jobs that could be a good fit for you.

You can also use the app’s filters to find jobs based on when the employer posted the job opportunity, the job type (full-time jobs vs. part-time jobs), and the distance from your location.

There’s also a search bar if you’d like to look for specific job categories and titles (e.g. barista jobs) or specific companies.

Step 4: Apply for interesting jobs 

Once you’ve found an interesting job, you can usually apply for it with just one push of a button. Seriously!

For any job that’s labeled “EASY APPLY”, all you have to do is click a button and you’re done. The employer will receive your application, review the information listed on your profile, and contact you if they agree you could be a good fit for the job.

Step 5: Interview for jobs

If employers like your profile, you can set up a video interview within the app. And because JobGet really does make it simple for employers and job seekers, all of these steps (1-5) could happen as soon as today!

Final Thoughts

If you’re looking to find an hourly job near you ASAP, JobGet could be your new favorite job search app! With features like instant chat with employers, an automatic resume builder, and a one-click application process, it’s a job app that can help you find your next job in no time.

But, as we mentioned earlier, JobGet may not be the right job app for you if you’re looking for salaried positions that require advanced proficiency in technical skills.

And if you’re looking for other ways to make and save money, check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics like how to save money in college and how to build credit fast!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Creating a good video submission is more art than science. Just like how you can’t write a good essay without preparation, you can’t make a good video essay just by clicking a “record” button.

More and more scholarships are allowing applicants to submit short videos instead of written essays, so it’s important to know the best practices and rules of thumb when creating a video essay.

In this blog post, we’ll share some useful tips on how to make an effective video essay that will help make your application stand out!

#1 Prepare in Advance
Write out a short outline or script.
Revise your script for content and clarity.
Make sure to double check the time limit and specifications before you film!
Think about your response, practice it, and make sure you hit all the points you want to make.
Do not read from the script, as this will be obvious to the viewer. Instead, the purpose of the script is to remind you of the points you want to make. 
#2 Choose a quiet space
Once you’ve established your response, let anyone who you share a household or office with know not to disturb you.
Before you start recording, close any programs that might prompt you with push notifications or pop-ups.
Check to see if you have at least an hour of battery life or, better yet, plug into a power source!
#3 Lighting
Find a well-lit area and turn on your camera and adjust your placement to ensure you have a clear background behind you.
Adjust your lighting and position to find an arrangement that shines light on your face, rather than backlighting you.
#4 Video
Clean the lens on your camera or webcam before recording the video.
Videos DO NOT need to be professionally filmed, lit, edited etc. — you can use your phones or laptops to record.
If you’re using a phone, stabilize it by propping it up between two books or using a phone tripod. 
Generally, the best practice is to film in landscape (horizontally) and position your camera at eye level.
#5 Address the prompt
Make sure no matter how you put the video together that you’re addressing the prompt using specific details
Be specific and tailor your responses.
#6 Submitting
Make sure to review your video to ensure that it has uploaded successfully and the resolution is clear without glitches, awkward moments or other problems!
Remember to take your time with your response, be yourself, and speak from the heart, and you’ll do great.

If you follow the tips above, you’ll be on your way to recording better college and scholarship video essays!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
It’s no secret that college can be expensive. Between tuition, room and board, textbooks, and all of the costs that come with making the most of your college experience, it’s easy to either go into debt or be broke the entire time.

But you know what? It doesn’t have to be this way! There are ways to save money while you’re in college. And, if you’re disciplined, there are ways you can make money too!

And, in this blog post, we’re going to show you how. We’ve compiled 30 of our favorite tips on how to save money in college on everything from tuition to your entertainment budget. And, at the end, we also share some ways you can make some extra cash too! 

Sound good? Let’s jump right in! 

Ways to Save Money on Tuition and College Expenses

Here are 6 tips to help you save money in college on tuition and other education-related expenses.

#1 Complete the FAFSA early every year

The FAFSA is the Free Application for Federal Student Aid. We know you’ve probably heard of it and, hopefully, filled it out at least once so far. So you know, it can help cut down your costs for college by qualifying you for free money from the government to fund your education. 

But did you know that the best financial aid packages (i.e. more grants and scholarships vs federal student loans) go to students who complete the FAFSA application ASAP? Well, you do now! 

Every year the application opens in October. Set a reminder in your calendar right now for every year that you’re in school so that you can maximize your chances of getting the best financial aid package throughout college.

#2 Apply for as many scholarships as you can

The FAFSA isn’t your only way to get financial aid. You can also get financial aid in the form of scholarships. And you know the best part? There’s no limit to how much scholarship money you can win. You may even win enough scholarship money to graduate debt free! 

You just have to do the work and apply for as many scholarships as you can. You also have to know how to find all the scholarships you qualify for. How do you do that? Download the Scholly App! It instantly matches you with hundreds of thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits!

#3 Get a job that has a tuition reimbursement program

If you’re going to work while in school, consider getting a job that has a tuition reimbursement program. What’s that? A tuition reimbursement program is an employee benefit offered by companies who want to support their employees who pursue higher education.

By taking advantage of this employee benefit, you can get some of your education expenses reimbursed by your employer. Not sure how to find a job that offers this type of education assistance? Check out our list of 50 companies that offer tuition reimbursement programs!

#4 Take general education courses at a community college

If you’re looking to save money on tuition, consider taking some general education courses at a community college. You can usually transfer those community college courses toward your degree at a 4-year college and pay a fraction of the cost.

How much money can you save? Well, according to the Education Data Initiative, the average cost per college credit at a 4-year college is $636. On the other hand, the average cost per college credit at a community college is $141. That’s a lot of money that can be saved!

#5 Don’t buy new textbooks from the campus bookstore

Textbooks can be expensive. Well, perhaps it’s better to say that NEW textbooks purchased at the campus bookstore can be expensive. But guess what! You don’t need to get your textbooks from the campus bookstore.

Instead, consider buying your textbooks used online, borrowing them from your peers, renting them from companies like Chegg, and looking around at local bookstores.

#6 Order school supplies online in bulk

When compared to tuition, school supplies like notebooks, folders, and pens are relatively cheap. But you’ll be buying those same supplies every year for 12+ classes. So, why not save yourself a bit of money by just ordering those supplies in bulk online?

We know this isn’t one of the money-saving tips that will single-handedly prevent you from going into student loan debt. If only it were that easy… But, hey, every little bit counts!

Ways to Save Money on Housing and Utilities

Here are 5 tips to help you start saving money on housing and utilities while you’re in college.

#7 Live off-campus with roommates

Did you know living off-campus with roommates can be cheaper than living in a dorm? Sure, you’ll have to pay for things like rent, utilities, and groceries. But you’ll likely save money in the long run because most student housing plans are not cheap! 

So, why not do a bit of browsing at the local listings and compare prices between living in a dorm and living in a shared apartment. Of course, all of this depends on where your college is located. If it’s right in the middle of the most expensive part of town, it probably makes more sense to stay in the dorms.

#8 Buy used furniture from thrift stores and online marketplaces

If you do decide to live off-campus, you’ll need furniture. And as tempting as it may be to decorate your apartment as you’ve always dreamed with brand new furniture, don’t do it! You’ll be surprised at just how expensive a new rug, desk, or even just a simple chair can be.

Instead of buying new, shop for used furniture at thrift stores and online marketplaces like Facebook Marketplace. You can often find pieces that are still in great condition and save a lot of money this way.

#9 Open a college student-friendly bank account

You may not have a lot of money right now. But you still need a bank to store the money you do have. And you want to make sure you’ve chosen a bank that isn’t needlessly taking your money either!

As a student, you’ll want to look for a bank account that offers perks like no-fee checking and savings accounts, free ATMs, and mobile banking. This will help you avoid fees, save money, and better manage your spending habits in the long run.

There are many banks where you can go to open a student-friendly checking account. But we recommend checking out the Aspiration Spend and Save Account. It’s an online account that offers all of the perks we just mentioned. And, on top of that, it’s also the most environmentally-friendly banking option you can find. Check out our Aspiration review to learn more!  

#10 Manage your expenses using a service like Rocket Money (formerly known as Truebill)

If you’re not careful, things like utility bills, recurring fees, and subscriptions can add up quickly. By using a service like Rocket Money, you can make sure you’re not being overcharged and save money on expenses that you might otherwise miss. 

Plus, Rocket Money doesn’t cost anything for a basic account. They only charge you when they successfully secure savings for you!

#11 Ask for practical gifts on your birthday and holidays

This isn’t the most fun money-saving tip. But it is effective! Because you can save a lot of money by telling your friends and family you’d prefer practical gifts for your birthday and holidays.

What’s a practical gift? It’s any gift that saves you from spending money on a necessary expense. For example, it could be a gift card to your favorite grocery store, a new piece of software you need for your studies, or an appliance like a coffee machine so you can stop spending money at the coffee shop down the street.

Ways to Save Money on Food and Drinks

Here are 7 tips to help you save money on food and drinks while in college.

#12 Attend on campus events with free food

One of the best things about college life is that there are practically always events with free food happening on campus. Whether it’s a club meeting or a departmental seminar, take advantage of these opportunities to save money on your food budget and learn more about what’s going on at your college.

#13 Take full advantage of your student meal plan

Going out to dinner every so often is nice. But if you want to save some serious money, then make the most of your student meal plan. This is, of course, assuming you’re on a student meal plan. If you are, try to eat all your meals on campus (at least throughout the week) and you’ll see a dramatic decrease in your food expenses.

#14 Sign up for grocery store membership cards

Most grocery stores and supermarkets offer some sort of membership or loyalty card. By signing up for these cards, you can receive special discounts and save a lot of money on your groceries each month. Just make sure to use the card every time you shop to maximize your savings.

#15 Buy groceries in bulk

Another way to save money on groceries is to buy in bulk from stores like Sam’s Club or Costco. These stores offer great deals on large quantities of food, which can help you save a lot of money in the long run.

#16 Use grocery store coupons

There’s nothing wrong with using coupons to save money on groceries. In fact, it’s a great way to stretch your budget and get more for your money. Just be sure to only use coupons for items that you actually want to purchase. You aren’t really saving money if you use coupons to buy food you’ll never eat!

#17 Learn how to cook your own food

Cooking food at home is almost always cheaper than eating at a restaurant, so it’s a great way to save money as a college student. If you’re not sure how to cook, there are plenty of resources available on YouTube that can teach you the basics.

#18 Make your own coffee

It’s a lot cheaper to make coffee at home rather than buying it from a café. All you need is a coffee pot and some quality beans.

Sure, maybe you’ll never be able to make an Iced White Chocolate Mocha like you’d get at Starbucks. But making your own coffee isn’t that hard to do! So, if you wanted to, you could be your own Starbucks barista with a bit of effort and time.

Ways to Save Money on Entertainment

Here are 4 ways to save money in college on entertainment-related expenses.

#19 Be on the lookout for free events

There are always free events happening in your city and college campus. So, be on the lookout so you don’t miss the ones that interest you most! From concerts to museum exhibits, there’s something for everyone. Not sure where to look? Check out events that are advertised on Meetup, Eventbrite, and Facebook events.

#20 Take advantage of student discounts using your student ID

There are tons of companies that offer student discounts, so make sure you always have your student ID on you. You can get significant discounts at movie theaters, restaurants, clothing stores, car rental companies, and a whole lot more. 

Check out this ultimate list of student discounts to see just how many places you can save money just by being a college student.

#21 Use your student gym membership

Don’t waste your money on a gym membership. If your school has a gym, take advantage of it! Sign up for group fitness classes. Make plans to work out with your friends. Go there for a study break.

#22 Share the costs of subscriptions for streaming services with friends

You can split the costs of subscription services with friends. For example, a Spotify Premium Family Plan costs $15.99/month and can be used by up to 6 people. So, if you split the costs with 5 friends, you’ll each pay less than $3/month, which is even cheaper than the Student Plan!

Ways to Save Money on Transportation and Travel

Here are 4 ways college students can save money on transportation and travel.

#23 Use public transportation as often as possible

Having a car while you’re in college is cool. But have you seen how much gas and car insurance costs?! Don’t spend your money on a car if you don’t have to. Public transportation is much cheaper than owning a car. Not to mention, it’s better for the environment!

#24 Get a bike

If public transportation’s not your thing, consider getting a bike. Biking is a great way to get around and it’s good exercise, too!

#25 Carpool with your friends

If you do have a car and live far away from campus, carpool with your friends to save on gas money. Planning a carpool system can be tricky at first. But if you can find friends who have a similar class schedule it can work out great.

If you frequently go off campus, you can also save money by splitting the costs of an Uber or Lyft with friends or classmates going to nearby locations.

#26 Plan your holiday vacations and travel plans in advance

You already know when things like Winter Vacation and Spring Break are going to happen. So, save as much money as you can by planning your trips early! This way you can take advantage of cheaper airfare and discounts on accommodation.

Ways to Make Extra Money in College

And, last but not least, here are 4 ways to make extra money while in college. For even more ways to make money, check out our list of ways to make an extra $500 a month!

#27 Start investing

Investing can be a great way to grow your money over time. And if you start when you’re young, you’ll be more likely to accumulate enough money to reach your financial goals.

Plus, these days, you don’t even need a lot of money to get started. Some even pay you to learn about investing, like Tornado! And that is just 1 of many options for beginner investors. You can learn more by reading our guide on how to start investing as a college student!

#28 Start a side hustle

Everyone usually recommends college students to get part-time jobs. And this is good advice if you can find one that accommodates your busy schedule. But, if you want a more flexible work schedule, another great option is to start a side hustle.

This can be anything from freelance writing to dog walking. You can use the money you make to pay for things like textbooks or rent, or you can save it. Again, you can check out our list of ways to make extra money for even more ideas and where to find work for each side hustle!

#29 Sell your unused stuff on online marketplaces

You likely have a lot of stuff lying around your house that you don’t use anymore. Why not sell it on an online marketplace like eBay, Craigslist, or Facebook Marketplace? You’d be surprised how much money you can make this way. And, on top of that, you can declutter your home at the same time!

#30 Resell products you find on online marketplaces

Have you heard of the phrase “one man’s trash is another man’s treasure?” It definitely applies to online marketplaces because you can find a lot of products for dirt cheap prices or free, and then resell them for a higher price. This is a great way to make some extra money. And it doesn’t take too much effort!

Final Thoughts

College is, without a doubt, expensive. But we hope you can use some of the tips we’ve shared here to start cutting down on unnecessary costs! 

And, if you want more tips on how to better manage your finances in college, check out the rest of our blog where we share advice on topics like how to build credit fast and how to get the best tax refund as a college student!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Graduation is coming up and you still don’t have a job? Many students wait until they graduate to start looking for a job. But is this the best idea? Nope! 

You know why? Because it can take months to find a job. So, it’s important to start early! But we also get it. If this is your first time applying for a job, it’s a lot of work that’s incredibly easy to procrastinate on. 

But since you’re here, we think you know it’s time to take your job search seriously. Good job! And you’re in the right place because, in this blog post, we’ve compiled the information and resources to help you every step of the way! 

Here’s a preview of what you’ll learn: 

The best time to start applying for jobs as a senior year student
What you need to submit impressive job applications 
Where and how to look for job openings 
The 6 essential steps to applying for a job 
7 job search tips specifically for students 

Let’s get started! 

When to Start Applying for Jobs

Here’s an unfortunate truth for every one of your peers that’s going to wait until the last minute to find a job: the average job search takes around five to six months! 

Is everyone’s job search timeline going to be the same? Of course not. But starting at least six months before your expected graduation date gives you time to land a job that is a good fit for you. 

Because do you know what will happen to your classmates that wait until a few months before or after graduation? Well, they’re more likely to take the first job that comes along, even if it’s not the best fit. Don’t let that happen to you! 

What You Need to Apply for Jobs

The hiring and application process at companies will vary. But, for the most part, the things employers ask for are the same no matter the position or industry. 

Most likely, you’ll need to have a resume, cover letter, and references. Let’s look at each of those things now and point you to a resource that shows you how to create it like a pro.

Resume

A resume is a 1-2 page document that lists your work experience, skills, and education. It’s one of the most important parts of your job application. But it’s also one of the easiest to get wrong – especially if you don’t know how to format your resume for applicant tracking systems (ATS). 

What’s an applicant tracking system? Basically, it’s a software used by hiring teams to weed out applicants that probably aren’t a good fit for the job. The software does that by scanning your resume looking for keywords related to the required skills and experience for the job. 

If your resume doesn’t include enough of the right keywords, your application can get rejected before it even gets seen by human eyes! 

The solution? Watch the video below with tips on how to format your resume for applicant tracking systems. You can also use a resume scanner tool that scans your resume and shows you how to improve it so that it makes it past the software.

Of course, you also want to write a resume that appeals to humans, not just software. So, for tips on that, check out this guide on how to write a student resume.

Cover Letter

A cover letter is a document that you send with your resume when you apply for a job. In your cover letter, you should explain why you are interested in the job and why you would be a good fit for the position.

Some people will tell you that cover letters are no longer necessary or that no one reads them. But that doesn’t mean you won’t need to write one. Some employers still ask for them. And they use them to make a first impression of you.

So, don’t throw out the idea of writing a cover letter! Instead, take the time to write a good one that – even if skimmed – makes it clear why you’re worth bringing in for an interview. 

Here’s an excellent guide on how to write a cover letter that stands out.

References

When you apply for a job, you may be asked to provide the contact information for one to three references. References are people that can speak to your work ethic and skills. Generally, your references will come from coworkers, teachers, or past employers.

Not every job will ask for references. But, for the ones that do, you want to know beforehand who you can trust to provide the best references. 

To figure out who to ask and how to prep that person so they can give the best reference possible, check out this informative guide on how to get the best employment references.

Where to Look for Entry-Level Jobs

Unless you already have substantial work experience, you’re likely looking at entry-level jobs as a soon to be graduate. 

Entry-level jobs are usually found on online job boards. These websites allow you to search for jobs based on your location, skills, educational background, and more. You can also find entry-level jobs by searching the websites of companies you’re interested in.

Job Boards

There are many different job boards out there. But here are a few of the best ones: 

JobGet

JobGet is an online job board and marketplace app that aims to cut down on the time you have to spend searching for a job. On JobGet, employers and job seekers can instant message each other, schedule meetings, and set up video interviews within minutes.

LinkedIn

LinkedIn is the world’s most popular social media platform for professionals and job searchers. On LinkedIn, you can create a profile that can serve as your virtual resume, connect with recruiters and hiring managers, network with people who have your dream job, and search for jobs on the platform’s job board. 

Indeed

Indeed is one of the most popular job boards worldwide. The platform pulls job ads from a variety of different sources, including company websites and recruiting agencies. All of this gives Indeed users one of the most comprehensive lists of available jobs. 

Company Websites

You can also find jobs by searching the “careers” pages of company websites. This is a great way to find jobs that may not be advertised on online job boards. For example, if you wanted to find jobs at Amazon, you can see every job that they’re currently hiring for here. 

If you take this approach to look for jobs, just be sure to go through all of the job requirements before applying. Many company websites don’t allow you to filter your search for entry-level jobs. 

How to Apply for Jobs As a Student 

Everyone’s job search is different. But, typically, you’ll follow a similar set of steps as your peers when beginning the process of finding and applying for jobs. Usually, it goes something like this…

Step 1 – Search for jobs that fit your skills and interests  

The best way to start your job search is by figuring out what kind of jobs you’re interested in. But you’re not alone if you’re not exactly sure what type of job that is. 

So, what can you do? Consider taking a career aptitude test. What’s that? A career aptitude test is basically a quiz that asks you questions about your work preferences and personality. Based on your answers, the test generates a list of potential jobs and different industries that you might enjoy. 

There are many ​​different online career aptitude tests. Here are a few of the most popular ones that you can take for free: 

123 Career Test 
CareerOneStop Interest Assessment 
CareerOneStop Skills Matcher 
CareerExplorer 
Truity Career Tests
Step 2 – Research the companies before you apply

Before applying for a job, do your research into the company. Why? Because you’re going to spend a lot of time at your job working with the same people every day. So, you want to make sure that it’s a job you’ll like! 

Here are some questions to think about when researching companies: 

Company Values. What are the company’s core values? Do they align with your values? Do you support the decisions and statements they’ve made on important issues? 
Company Culture. Are employees encouraged to have work-life balance? Will there be opportunities for you to grow in this company? 
Employee Satisfaction. Have current and former employees enjoyed working at this company? How long do people tend to work there? 
Employee Benefits. Does the employer offer employee benefits that are important to your well-being and professional growth like flexible work schedules or tuition reimbursement programs? 

You can find some, but not all, of this information directly on the company’s website. So, we recommend also doing things like checking out employee reviews on Glassdoor and reaching out directly to former or current employees on LinkedIn. 

Here’s a helpful guide that shares more information on how to research companies before you apply. 

Step 3 – Tailor your resume and cover letter to fit the company

For every job you apply to, your resume and cover letter should be tailored to fit the company and job position. This is how you show you’re the perfect candidate.

Yes, that means more work for you. But it also means a higher chance of getting an interview! According to one study, 61% of hiring managers and recruiters said that a customized resume is the best way to boost your chances of getting a job offer.  

In your resume, you should highlight the skills and experience that are relevant to the job you are applying for. And in your cover letter, you should explain why you are interested in the company and which of your past experiences prove you can handle the core job responsibilities.

Here’s a helpful video that walks you through 3 easy steps to tailor your resume.

Step 4 – Submit your job applications 

When you’re ready to submit a job application, it’s important to follow the application instructions carefully. Some jobs may require you to submit a resume and cover letter, while others may just require you to fill out an online application. 

It’s also important to note the deadlines for applications. Some jobs may have rolling deadlines, while others have a fixed deadline for when they’ll stop accepting new applications. 

Step 5 – Follow up on your applications 

After you apply, give it some time. The length of the hiring process can vary based on the company. But you can typically follow up after a week or two.

A good way to follow up is to send an email. In your message, you should remind the employer of who you are and why you’re a good fit for the position.

Unfortunately, it’s also not uncommon for companies to “ghost” you and never reply to your job application. So, if you don’t get a response after following up once or twice, just let that one go. You’re better off redirecting your focus to your other job applications. 

Step 6 – Prepare for interviews

If the hiring manager likes your resume and cover letter, they may contact you to arrange an in-person interview or a phone interview. And, this is a big deal. So, don’t try to wing the interview process. This is your future career on the line! Treat developing your interview skills seriously. 

That means preparing enough so that you’re able to talk about your experience in a way that is both confident and humble, having thoughtful responses to common interview questions, and preparing a smart list of questions to ask at the end of the interview. 

One of the best ways to approach interview preparation is to do even more research into the company and the position. Here’s a helpful video on how to research companies before you have your interview.

7 Job Search Tips for Students 

Want to further boost your chances of getting hired before graduation? Here are 7 job search tips that will help do just that! 

# 1 Make sure your social media profiles are presentable 

These days, a lot of employers will research an applicant online before even inviting them in for an interview. That means that you need to make sure your social media profiles are appropriate and presentable. Anything that you wouldn’t want potential employers to see – take it down or make it private!

#2 Use LinkedIn and other social media strategically  

LinkedIn can be a powerful tool when looking for a job. But, you have to know how to use it correctly. That means making sure your LinkedIn profile is up-to-date and showcases your best work experience, connecting with the right people, and being active on the platform. Here’s a really good list of tips to optimize your LinkedIn profile.

The same goes for Twitter, Instagram, TikTok, Snapchat, and really any social media platform. If you want to use them to help you get a job, you can! For example, you can do things like actively connect with people that work at the companies you want to work for, create content relevant to your target job’s audience, and show off your professional skills. 

#3 Ask your friends, classmates, teachers, and family about job opportunities 

Sometimes open jobs are not posted on job boards or company websites. And this is why networking can be extremely important. Part of your network is the people you already know, like friends and family. 

These people can be a great resource when you’re trying to get a job. They might know someone who’s hiring or they might be able to put in a good word for you. 

But, you have to ask them for help! Just because they know you’re looking for a job doesn’t mean they’ll think to reach out to you when some job opening or great opportunity comes up. 

#4 Conduct informational interviews 

Another way to use the people you know to help you find a job is by asking for informational interviews. What are those? Basically, they’re just conversations with people who are already working in the position or company that you want to work at. 

And these conversations can be extremely valuable! By meeting with these people for informational interviews, you can get advice on what it’s like to work at a specific company, how to prepare for an interview, and what the hiring process is like.

Here’s a step-by-step video tutorial to find the right people to ask for informational interviews: 

#5 Don’t limit yourself to jobs directly related to your major

Your major in college doesn’t determine your career path. In fact, most people end up working in a field that is completely unrelated to their degree.

So, don’t limit yourself when you’re job searching. If you’re interested in a certain company or organization, apply even if they’re not hiring for your specific major. You never know unless you try!

#6 Apply to interesting jobs even if you’re not 100% qualified

If a job posting sounds interesting to you, don’t be afraid to apply even if you’re not 100% qualified. Many employers are looking for people that are passionate and eager to learn. So, if you have the majority of the qualifications and you’re willing to learn the rest, go for it!

If you’re not 100% qualified, the key is to demonstrate that you have the ability and willingness to learn new things quickly. If you’re already enrolled in classes or taking online courses related to the position, be sure to mention any new skills or experience on your application or resume.

#7 Take advantage of your school’s career center and resources  

You don’t have to do everything on your own. You can get help from a career counselor at your school’s career center, reach out to the alumni association, and attend on-campus job fairs. Many schools and libraries also offer free access to online job databases and resources.

In other words, take advantage of all the help that’s available to you! These career services and resources can make a big difference. They are also great starting points if you’ve never applied for a job before.

Final Thoughts

Now that you know how to land a job before graduation, it’s time to start looking for jobs that suit your interests and skills.

Start by browsing job boards like JobGet and looking for openings that match your qualifications. Then, begin applying to jobs and networking with people in your desired career field.

Just don’t wait until the last minute. Start your job search today. When graduation comes around, you’ll be glad you did!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
As a college student, you may not realize it yet. But it’s important to know how and when to file your taxes. Of course, you may be wondering if you even have to file taxes and what happens if you don’t file taxes. 

In this blog post, we will answer all of your questions and give you tips on how to get the best tax refund possible! 

So, whether you are a first-time tax filer or just need a refresher, keep reading for information that will help you save money this tax season.

Do College Students Have to File Taxes?

Yes, but only if you’ve made over a certain amount. How much? You don’t need to file taxes if you’ve earned less than $12,950 (or $25,900 for married couples filing jointly) during the 2021 tax year. 

You also don’t need to file taxes if all of your income was from tax-exempt sources like scholarships or grants. 

What Happens if You Don’t File Taxes?

If you do need to file taxes but forget or decide not to, you could face some serious consequences. 

To start, the IRS will send a letter to your last known address asking for taxes owed. If you don’t respond to the letter and take care of what is due, they will eventually begin contacting any other sources that have your information. For example, they might contact your family members or employers.

If they still can’t reach you, the IRS can take legal action and send your information to a private collection agency. 

If you continue to avoid taxes, they can begin to do things like:

Legally seize some of your property (e.g. your car)
Take money directly from your paychecks or bank accounts
Block you from renewing or applying for a passport
Withhold your tax refund 
What Documents Do You Need to File Taxes?

So, if you do need to file taxes, what do you need? Here’s what H&R Block says are the essential tax documents to have on hand when filing taxes.

Your personal information. This includes – but is not limited to – your social security number, tax ID number, and your bank account information. 
Information about any dependents. If you’re a parent or caretaker, you’ll need to have information like your child’s social security number, childcare records, and more. 
Sources of income. From your current and past employers during the last tax year, you’ll need to get a W2. If you were unemployed, you’ll need to get a form called a 1099-G. If you were self-employed with, for example, a side hustle, then you’ll need things like a 1099 and records of your income and expenses.
Forms for any eligible tax deductions. You may be eligible for multiple tax deductions or tax credits. We won’t list all of those here. But you can see examples on the full tax prep list from H&R Block that we linked above. As a student, though, you’re likely to need a 1098-T form from your college, receipts for qualified education expenses, and records of the scholarships you’ve received. 

This information here isn’t exhaustive. You may need more tax forms than that. So, be sure to do more research on your specific situation or get help from a tax professional. 

How to get your W2

Your employer should send you a W2 or give you one upon request. This is the quickest way to get your W2. But if you have trouble getting it from your employer(s), you can also request a copy from the IRS.

When Is This Year’s Tax Deadline? 

This year, the tax deadline is Monday, April 18, 2022. But that doesn’t mean you should wait until then. If you need to file taxes, start working on that ASAP. And use the tips below to save some money when you do!  

6 Tax Tips for College Students 

Here are 6 tax tips that are specifically relevant to you as a college student. If you have to file taxes and follow these tips, you’ll be on your way to getting the best return possible!

#1 Check your dependency status 

Will your parents claim you as a dependent on their tax return? If not, meaning you will claim yourself as a dependent on your own tax return, then you can take advantage of certain tax credits and deductions. 

If your parents do claim you on their tax return, then you’re not eligible for these tax benefits. So, if you aren’t receiving their help to pay for college, it may make sense to ask your parents not to claim you on their tax return. 

#2 Take advantage of student tax credits

As a college student, you are eligible for several education tax credits that can help lower your taxes. Two popular education credits include the American Opportunity Credit and Lifetime Learning Credit.

The American Opportunity tax credit lets you claim up to $2,500 per tax return for qualified education expenses related to your undergraduate education. For example, your tuition and fees for college count as qualified expenses.

The Lifetime Learning Credit also lets you claim 20% of the first $10,000 of college tuition and fees paid during the year, which works out to be a maximum credit of $2,000.

It is important to note that these two credits cannot be used at the same time.

#3 Pay interest on student loans

If you have student loans, you can deduct the amount of interest paid on them from your taxable income. This is referred to as the student loan interest deduction and is a great tax benefit if you’re already working to pay off your student loans. 

By applying for this deduction, you can deduct up to $2,500 per year. So, make sure to include it on your tax return! But this is one of those benefits only applies if your parents don’t claim you on their tax return. 

#4 Apply for scholarships

Scholarships are not subject to taxes and won’t be included in your taxable income! This can save you a lot of money if you’re receiving multiple scholarships throughout the year. 

We realize that, if you don’t already have scholarships, this tip doesn’t really help you save money this tax season. But, as a college student, it’s something to keep in mind for the coming year. It’s also a good reason to find and apply for scholarships as soon as you have time. 

#5 File your taxes even if, technically, you don’t have to

Even if you don’t need to file a tax return this year (because your income during 2021 was below the $12,950 per year threshold), it still may be in your best interest to do it anyway. Why? Because there’s a chance you’re eligible for tax credits and a refund.

For example, if you had a part-time job or a work-study job, you probably had taxes taken out from your paychecks. If you file taxes, you could get all of that money back as a tax refund. 

#6 Learn how to file your taxes for free

Yes, there is such a thing as free tax filing. In fact, the IRS offers a program called Free File that lets you file a tax return for free using commercial software. 

You can also get free tax help and use free editions of online tax filing software from companies like Credit Karma’s Cash App Taxes (you can also use Credit Karma to check your credit score for free too). Using this online software, you can file a basic tax return for free.

If you’re looking to save some money, these free online tax software are great options. Just be sure to read the fine print beforehand, as there are some restrictions on who can use them.

Key Takeaways

As a college student, filing taxes is probably the last thing you want to think about. But by following the tips we shared in this blog post, you can make the process as painless as possible and get the most money back in your tax refund!

And if you want more money-saving and money-making tips, be sure to check out the rest of our blog. It’s where we share in-depth tips and advice on topics like how to start investing and how to build credit fast.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
500 words. It doesn’t sound like much. But when you’re asked to write a 500 word essay, you’re not alone if you find yourself staring aimlessly at a blank screen — especially when it comes to essays for college and scholarship applications.

Why? Because, often, you’re trying to write it using the standard essay format you learned in school. You know the format. It typically goes like this: introduction with  a thesis statement, body paragraphs supporting the thesis, and conclusion paragraphs that restate your thesis.

BUT college admissions officers and scholarship selection committees usually aren’t looking for those types of 500 word essays. 

So, how do you write the type of  500 word essay that can help you get into college and win college scholarships? Keep reading! Because, in this blog post, we’re going to discuss:

How the goal of a college or scholarship essay is different from the goal of an academic paper
How to format a 500 word essay for college and scholarship applications
2 examples of essays you can look to for inspiration
5 tips to help improve your writing process when writing these essays

Let’s dive into that first point right now!

The Goal of a 500 Word Essay for College and Scholarship Applications

Your goal when writing college and scholarship application essays is simple: stand out as one of the most qualified and interesting applicants. And that’s much different from the goal you have when writing an academic paper for a high school or college class. 

In those classes, you’re usually writing essays to explain, argue for, or defend an idea. For example, your high school teacher might ask you to write a 500 word essay on a topic like, “Is testing products on animals ethical?” 

But you’re unlikely to find this type of question on college and scholarship applications. Why? Because few college admissions officers and scholarship selection committees want to read thousands upon thousands of essays from students who all write about the same thing using the same structure. 

They’d much rather learn more about what makes you and your way of thinking unique! And that’s why you’re more likely to find essay prompts like: 

“Has there been a time when you’ve had a long-cherished or accepted belief challenged? How did you respond? How did the challenge affect your beliefs?” (Coalition Application)
“Tell us about what you value in a community and how your perspective, lived experiences, or beliefs might contribute to your College community.” (Sarah Lawrence College) 
“How has creativity helped you in problem solving?” (Dixie Belle Paint Company Scholarship)

Do you see what we’re talking about? Your goal with these types of essays isn’t to make an evidence-based argument to support a thesis statement. Nope. Your goal with this essay type is to give the person reading it a better idea of who you are as a person! 

But how do you format and write such an essay? Let us show you how! 

How to Format a 500 Word Essay for College and Scholarship Applications

To write an amazing essay for college and scholarship applications you’ve got to use your creative writing skills. And, oftentimes, that means breaking the standard “introduction, body paragraphs, conclusion” essay format you’d use for high school or college papers.

Here’s a format you can follow instead. 

Hook introduction

The first one or two lines of your essay are the most important. And, therefore, they need to be engaging. Because, if they’re not, do you know what your reader is likely to do? Skim. Scan. And get bored real quick. 

That’s why for these types of 500 word essays, you’ve got to start with a hook introduction. What’s that? It’s an opening to your essay that’s so intriguing that your reader can’t help but keep reading because they’re hooked and want to know more. 

There are a few ways to go about writing a hook introduction. Check out some of the awesome examples in this video from the College Essay Guy.

Context for the hook 

Now that you’ve got your reader hooked, you need to give them context. Why are you telling this story? What’s the importance of this moment in your life? What does it say about you? 

Bring your reader into your essay using descriptive details that show rather than tell why you’re a deserving applicant. If you’re not sure what it means to show rather than tell, don’t worry. We explain that writing technique in the 5 essay writing tips we share later in this blog post. 

Examples that showcase your strengths 

Once you’ve given context, your job is to tell the story in a way that showcases your strengths that are related to the essay prompt. For instance, if the prompt asks you about creativity in problem solving, walk your reader through a moment you creatively solved a complex problem. 

BUT please resist the urge to be too obvious. You don’t need to say something like “this story is a great example of how I creatively solve problems.” Why? Because that’s boring, and you know it! 

That boring sentence is also a great example of doing more telling than showing, which is the opposite of what you want to do. Again, you want to describe your strengths in a way that makes them clear and memorable in your readers’ minds. 

A conclusion that makes it clear you’ve responded to the essay prompt

You’re almost done! Now, you just need to wrap up your story nicely with a strong conclusion. But, again, this isn’t a research paper for your World History class. So, ditch boring phrases like “in conclusion” or “in summary”. Instead, use natural language to tell the end of the story. 

But also remember: this is an essay to get you into college or win scholarship money. So, make sure you’ve fully responded to the prompt. For example, in scholarship applications, you may want to wrap up your essay by specifically stating how the scholarship will benefit your education. 

500 Word Essay Examples 

Want to see some examples before you start writing your 500 word essay? Good idea! Here are two examples of winning essays that ditched the standard essay format and told an engaging, memorable story related to the essay prompt. 

Example 500 Word Essay #1

The first essay comes from a student admitted to Johns Hopkins University. The essay was originally posted on JHU’s “Essays that Worked” section of its undergraduate admissions website. 

Essay prompt: Founded on a spirit of exploration and discovery, Johns Hopkins University encourages students to share their perspectives, develop their interests and pursue new experiences. Use this space to share something you’d like the admissions committee to know about you (your interests, your background, your identity or your community) and how it has shaped what you want to get out of your college experience at Hopkins.

Essay length: 400 words

Essay: 

I cannot dance.

This is not something I often admit willingly; in fact, it is quite baffling to me how horribly incapable I am at performing even the most basic movements on command. My grandmother often describes it as “a tragedy” as she is forced to watch her grandchild absolutely butcher our country’s cultural dances, beautiful expressions of our unique West African roots turned into poor facsimiles by my robotic movements.

And yet, year after year, I find myself taking the dance floor at my family’s events, seemingly unaware of my objective lack of skill. Eventually, my display proves to be so amazingly unbearable that I am removed from the floor and shown the correct movements over and over again until I am able to replicate them well enough to come back. Bizarrely, despite my previous declaration that I cannot dance, for the past three years, I have found myself performing an entire choreographed routine at my school’s yearly pep rallies.

It is through looking back at these events that I realize that I have created a mischaracterization of my dancing abilities through my decisive first sentence. I can dance and am, in fact, very capable of doing so, but not when I act insularly. My ability to dance correlates directly with how willing I am to collaborate, the input and support of others turning the uncoordinated and unwieldy into the near-graceful.

My attempts at dancing have led me to value community and collaboration greatly, and I find myself seeking and being drawn towards environments that will allow me to continue to develop both of these values as I learn and grow. Through my internship with the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab, I was exposed to and became fascinated by the collaborative spirit that lies at the heart of Johns Hopkins. The idea that one cannot discover or innovate when working alone was affirmed during my research, and I have come to see that mutual collaboration and community are integral aspects of Johns Hopkins’ unique culture. From the research initiatives that breach the boundaries between class levels, to the many organizations such as the Tutorial Project, relying on the shared initiatives of different students to directly make an impact on Baltimore and its many communities, and the distinctive access to especially interdisciplinary topics such as neuromorphic systems, I view that Johns Hopkins exemplifies the peak of collaborative achievement in education.

Example 500 Word Essay #2

This second example essay was written by a student who won the Women’s World Banking’s Founder’s Scholarship. 

Essay prompt: Unfortunately, there’s no information listed about the essay prompt on the foundation’s website. But, based on the content of the essay, we assume that this was an essay asking the student to explain why she deserved this scholarship. 

Essay length: 464 words 

“Twice a week I head down to volunteer at the Los Sures Social Services office, situated next to the local senior citizen home, to help at the food pantry. We distribute food to people in my neighborhood. Many are familiar faces. Many are middle-aged Hispanic women with children dangling from their hips like grass skirts. These women are there as a result of their culture and lack of financial knowledge. In our Spanish culture, patriarchy prevents women from preparing for themselves as much as they should. This leads to Hispanic women having little or no money management skills. Financial illiteracy is a major issue in my neighborhood, and that is why I hope to give Hispanic women a chance for a better future through financial education.

While I was volunteering I met a woman who happened to live in the same building as my aunt. Unemployed with two young children, and a husband earning minimum wage at a fast food restaurant, she struggled to get by every day. I thought to myself – many in my community are just like her. Then I realized I could do something to help. How? I can start a financial literacy program, which teaches Hispanic women to earn and manage money. Once a woman becomes financially literate, she is capable of making good personal and professional decisions, empowering her to improve her family’s financial well-being. Moreover, such a program will help Hispanic women become competitive employees, even in a slow recovering economy such as the one we are experiencing now.

Participating in the 2013 Women’s World Banking Global Meeting in Amman, Jordan gives me access to invaluable resources that will help me achieve this goal. I hope to find mentors from a roomful of inspiring, experienced leaders who will offer me their guidance. Also, meeting accomplished women from other countries means access to new ideas and unique perspectives. And if I am lucky, I may even come across individuals who can provide financial support to jumpstart my financial literacy program for Hispanic women. Lastly, I will tell my idea to everyone I meet in Jordan, a baby step to help Hispanic women rise from poverty.

The world continues to change rapidly, especially with globalization. It is about time that Hispanic women strive for gender equality. Thus, it is essential that Hispanic women increase their roles and knowledge in finance. The women in my neighborhood shall no longer be left out. I will task myself to help these women become better, stronger and most importantly, take control of their lives. I want to be involved so that they can save themselves from any unforeseen financial crisis. This is a tremendous goal, but for me, it is an opportunity to make a difference – in my neighborhood and for my Spanish community.”

5 Crucial Essay Writing Tips for College and Scholarship Applications

There are tons of essay writing tips we could share with you on how to write amazing essays and improve your writing process. But, in this section, we’ll share just 5 of the tips we think are most important. For even more tips, you can check out our ultimate essay writing guide on how to write scholarship essays! 

#1 Tell a story about yourself related to the prompt 

Remember, admissions officers and scholarship selection committees are going to read hundreds, if not thousands, of essays all responding to the same writing prompt. The only way to truly make sure your essay stands out is to write about something no one else can write about. And the only way to do that is to structure your essay around a unique story from your life!

#2 Start your essay with a strong hook statement

We know we already said it. But we have to emphasize the importance of a hook introduction again! Because it’s a common mistake for college and high school students to start their introduction paragraph with something like, “I’m deserving of this scholarship because…” 

But that type of opening sentence is boring. It’s predictable. And it just screams that you didn’t even try to be creative. We know you don’t want that. So, start your essay strong using one of the writing techniques mentioned in the video we shared earlier in this article. 

#3 Use descriptive language

Another way to keep your readers engaged is to use descriptive language that forces them to use their imagination. This is what it means to show rather than tell. 

For example, instead of saying something like, “I felt scared to give a speech in front of my class” you can describe exactly how it felt. How? By saying something like, “as soon as I got to the front of the class, I could feel the hairs stand up on the back of my neck and my palms begin to sweat. But I took a long sip of water and told myself I just needed to focus on one word at a time.” 

When you show what you mean using descriptive writing rather than simply tell, you let readers see things from your perspective. And, as a result, you get them to root for you along your journey! 

#4 Stick to the word count

As you may have noticed in the example essays, you don’t always need to write exactly 500 words. You should do your best to get close to that word count. But it’s no problem if you write less as long as it’s within the recommended word count. 

However, what you definitely cannot do is write more than 500 words. Why not? Well, for one, writing too many words might make your reader think that you don’t know how to follow instructions. 

It might also be impossible to input more than 500 words for your essay if you’re applying online. So, if the prompt asks for 500 words, aim to write somewhere between 400-500 words! 

#5 Don’t submit your first draft 

Your first draft for any essay will never be your best draft. And that’s okay. It isn’t supposed to be. That’s why it’s important to give yourself enough time to proofread and edit your work before you submit your applications. 

We recommend using writing and editing tools like Grammarly, reading your essay aloud, and letting someone else proofread. By doing so, you’re more likely to catch grammar and spelling mistakes, confusing sentences, or anything that can leave readers with a bad impression.

Key Takeaways

Writing a 500 word essay for college and scholarship applications is not the same as writing an academic paper for high school and college classes. 

The essays you write for these applications should be engaging and tell an interesting story. To do that well, you’re better off avoiding the standard essay format that calls for an introduction, three body paragraphs, and a conclusion paragraph. 

Instead, follow the advice we’ve shared in this blog post and make sure your essay includes: 

A hook introduction 
Context for the hook 
Examples that showcase your strengths
A conclusion that makes it clear you’ve responded to the essay prompt

If you follow that formula, you’ll be on your way to writing better college and scholarship essays! 

Need help finding scholarships to try out the techniques you’ve learned? Download the Scholly App! It’s the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds of thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
[Quick note: If you want to skip ahead and learn about our preferred student loan refinance partner, sign up for Earnest today! They can help you lower your interest rate and cut years off your repayment plan!]

If you’re one of the 44.7 million people with student loan debt, you already know the monthly payments can be a pain. 

However, depending on your circumstances, you may be able to refinance your student loans and reduce your monthly payments. In other words, you can make things a lot easier on your budget! 

That’s why, in this blog post, we’re going to show you exactly how to refinance student loans, step-by-step. We’ll also be answering some common questions and sharing our pick for one of the best lenders for student loan refinancing.

But, first, just in case you don’t already know, let’s start with… 

What Does Student Loan Refinancing Mean?

When you refinance student loans, you are essentially transferring your current student loan balance to a new lender (e.g. a credit union, private bank).

Once the new lender approves your application to refinance, they’ll pay off the student loan amount you have with your original lender and issue you a new loan that should have more favorable terms and conditions. 

Who Qualifies for Student Loan Refinancing?

As long as your credit score is in good standing, you should qualify for student loan refinancing. But even if you need to improve your credit score, you still might be eligible for refinancing with the help of a co-signer.

What’s a co-signer?

A co-signer is someone who helps reduce the risk of refinancing by signing a contract to be responsible for making loan payments if, for whatever reason, you can’t. 

Who can be your co-signer? Usually, your co-signer will be a family member. For example, you might ask one of your parents to be your co-signer if they have a good credit score and stable income.

Should You Refinance Student Loans?

It depends. You might consider student loan refinancing an option if you find you can’t make your student loan payments because the monthly payments are too high. But that doesn’t mean it’s always a good idea. 

Pros and Cons of Refinancing Student Loans

Before refinancing student loans you should know that it isn’t the right move for everyone. There are pros and cons. Let’s take a look at those now. And then, if you decide it’s a good decision for you, keep reading to learn how to refinance student loans in 5 steps. 

Pros of Refinancing 

One monthly payment. When you refinance student loans, you convert multiple loans into one loan with a private lender. This means you’ll only have to keep up with one monthly payment instead of worrying about making multiple payments to multiple lenders each month. 

Lower interest rates. By choosing to refinance your student loans, you can often get a lower interest rate on your new loan if you have a good credit score. This can help you get a lower monthly payment and could save you money over time. 

Cons of Refinancing 

Lose access to federal student loan benefits. As a borrower of federal student loans, you have access to a variety of repayment options, protections, and benefits. For example, if you find it difficult to make your federal student loan payments, you can apply for an income-driven repayment plan, forbearance, or deferment.

If you work in certain professions, you can also apply for student loan forgiveness programs to get part of your debt forgiven. When you refinance federal loans, you give up all of these potential benefits. 

For example, if you had refinanced your federal student loans before March 2020, you’d be required to make monthly payments right now even though most federal student loan borrowers aren’t. Why? 

Because you wouldn’t have been eligible for the government mandated pause on student loan payments or any of the potential future initiatives to forgive or cancel (some) debt under President Joe Biden’s student loan forgiveness plan. 

It’s for these reasons that student loan refinancing is generally recommended for people with private student loans.

How to Refinance Student Loans in 5 Steps

Have you decided that student loan refinancing is a smart move for you? If so, here’s how to do it! 

Step 1: Find the Right Private Lender to Refinance

The first step is finding a private lender that can offer you competitive rates. Where do you look for these lenders and how do you know if their terms are competitive? 

There are many banks, credit unions, and private lenders for you to choose from. And, on their websites, you can usually request a quote for potential interest rates by filling out a form that asks about your: 

Contact information 
Educational background
Student loan debt 
Finances (annual income, savings, monthly payment for rent, etc.) 
Social security number 

The private lender will use that information to run a soft credit check (i.e. it won’t affect your credit score). This credit score check could take as little as 2 minutes. And, if you qualify, you’ll then have a range of offers from that lender with different interest rates and repayment options.   

Aim to request rates from multiple lenders so you can compare and ensure you’re choosing the best lender to refinance your student loans. 

Step 2: Choose the Best Lender and Loan Terms

With multiple interest rates and offers in hand, you’re ready to choose the best lender for your financial situation and goals. But what should you look for? How do you determine which one’s the best? 

Typically, you’re looking for the lender that can offer you the lowest interest rate. That way, you can reduce how much you need to pay on the loan over time. 

You’ll also want to compare repayment plans (e.g. how long you have to pay off the loan), repayment terms (e.g. late fees), and see which lender has the most enticing perks (e.g. the option to temporarily skip a payment). 

Step 3: Submit The Application

After you’ve decided on which lender to go with, you’ll need to submit a formal application to refinance your student loans. 

At this stage, you’ll be asked for copies of your: 

Government issued ID (e.g. drivers license) 
Proof of income (e.g. pay stubs, tax returns)
Social security number 
Official statements of the student loans you’d like to refinance 

After receiving your application, the lender will run another credit report check (this one may slightly affect your credit score) to determine the exact interest rate they can offer you. 

Step 4: Complete the Final Paperwork

If the lender approves your application, you’ll then need to complete some additional paperwork, sign a few documents, and indicate which of your student loans you want to refinance.

Once that’s completed, you’re almost done! But don’t forget about the next step.  

Step 5: Continue Making Regular Payments to Your Original Lender

Once the application is completed, your new lender will have to work with your original lender to pay off your student loan balance. The entire process typically takes between three to six weeks, but it could be longer. You’ll be notified by the new lender once everything is done. 

Until then, you should continue to make your monthly payments on time to the original lender of your student loan to avoid late payment penalties. You’ll be refunded if you end up making a monthly payment you didn’t need to make.

Final Thoughts 

If your monthly student loan payments are too high, you may want to see if you are eligible for refinancing. As we’ve shown in this post, student loan refinancing can help you lower your monthly payments, get a lower interest rate, and gain access to better repayment options.

But before you do any of that, you’ll want to compare student loan refinancing rates and terms from different lenders. That way, you select the lender that can help save you money!

We recommend looking at Earnest when doing that research. They offer some of the best benefits to borrowers, including payment flexibility, no fees, the option to make up a skipped payment, and an easy-to-use app to manage everything right from your phone.

And, if you want to learn about other ways to manage and reduce your student debt, check out the rest of our blog! There, we cover topics like how to apply for student loan forgiveness programs and how to pay off your student loans fast.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
As a teenager, school is one of your main priorities. But, if you want to use your extra time to make some extra cash, we definitely understand! And thanks to online jobs, you can do that without leaving your home. 

But how do you even get started? And how do you choose the online job best suited for your personality, interests, and level of commitment?

Research! But don’t worry. We’ve done most of that for you. 

In this blog post, we’ll be looking at 24 of the best online jobs for teens that require little to no experience to get started! 

We’ll also be giving you all the information you need to set yourself up for success by sharing:

How much money you can expect to make
The minimum age requirements
Websites where you can find work
The best tutorial or guide to learn more about the job 

But before we dig into that information, we need to answer some common questions that you or your parents are likely to have before you begin working online. 

Can you make money online legally as a teenager? 

Yes! As you’ll see below, some online jobs have age requirements that you need to meet. But, typically, you can make money online legally as a teenager by doing jobs that are either part of the gig economy or online work. 

Gig economy jobs mean you’re paid per task completed. Online work is more focused on building your own online business.

Also, depending on how much money you make, you may need to set aside some of your earnings to pay income taxes. For this part, make sure to get the help of your parents or a trusted adult.  

How much money can you make online as a teen?

One of the best parts about making money online is that there is no limit to how much you can make! It all depends on the job, your level of experience, and how much hard work you’re willing to put in. 

Either way, with just a few hours every week, you can realistically expect to make anywhere between $50 to $500 a month. And, as a teen with few expenses or bills, that’s a nice side hustle income! 

How do you receive money from online jobs? 

To collect your money from online jobs, you’ll need your own bank account and, usually, an account with an online financial service like Paypal. Luckily, setting up those accounts is pretty easy. Though, if you’re under 18, you’ll need a parent or guardian to help.

Once you’ve got those accounts opened, you can have your payments sent there on a regular schedule (e.g. monthly, weekly) or directly after you’ve completed a task. 

24 of the Best Online Jobs for Teens 

Ready to start making money online? Here are 24 of the best online jobs for teens! 

#1 Flip Products Online 

Flipping or reselling products has recently become a popular way to make money fast thanks to people like Gary Vaynerchuk. But if you’ve never heard of flipping, the idea is pretty much this: you find and buy an item being sold somewhere like a garage sale for cheap and then you resell the item for a higher price on an online marketplace like eBay. 

It can take some time to figure out the best products to flip. But, once you do, you’ll find that this is one of the quickest ways to make money online. Check out the video below to see how one guy flips products on Craigslist to make $100 a day! 

Minimum age requirement: No age limit 

How much you can make: $50-$500 per month

Websites to find and sell products: Craigslist, Facebook MarketPlace, eBay

Best tutorial:

#2 Play Video Games 

Yep, you’re reading that correctly! You can get paid to play video games. And there are a variety of ways to do this. You can test new video games, coach people on how to play your favorite video games, become a professional gamer, or build a following on Twitch. Check out the article below for more details on each of those ways and more. 

Minimum age requirement: No age limit 

How much you can typically make: $15-$100 per month

Websites to find work: MistPlay, Skillz Games, Inbox Dollars

Best tutorial: How to Make Money Playing Video Games (16 Easy Ways) 

#3 Tutoring

Are you particularly strong in any of your academic subjects at school? Or do you like speaking to non-native speakers of English or any other languages you speak? If so, you can make easy money being a one-on-one online tutor. 

All you need is a quiet location to conduct the online lessons, a profile on an online tutoring platform, and (of course) advanced knowledge of your tutoring subject. 

How much you can typically make: $10 – $35 per hour

Minimum age requirement: 14-18 years old, depending on the website 

Websites to find work: Tutorme.com, Care.com, iTalki, Preply, Cambly, Fiverr

Best tutorial: How to become an online tutor 

#4 YouTuber 

You’ve probably heard the stories about the kids and teenagers making millions on YouTube! Well, it’s not the easiest way to make money right away. But if you’re willing to play the long game and have an interest in making videos, it’s definitely worth thinking about! 

To be a YouTuber, you’ll need to consistently create and promote original video content about any topic that you like. Once you have enough viewers, you can earn money by placing ads on the videos. 

How much you can typically make: $3 – $5 per 1,000 video views

Minimum age requirement: 13 years old

Best tutorial: How To Start a YouTube Channel As a Teenager 

#5 Online Surveys 

You won’t make a ton of money from taking surveys. But they don’t take much time and they’re pretty easy. You’ll get paid for these surveys because they help companies learn more about their consumers and how people view their products. For this online job, all you need to do is register with one of the survey sites we’ve listed below. 

How much you can make: $0.5-$3 per survey

Minimum age requirement: 13 years old

Websites to find work: Survey Junkie, Swagbucks

Best tutorial: How To Earn Money By Taking Online Surveys 

#6 Writer

Do you like writing and sharing ideas? If so, you can find online jobs to write things like blog posts and social media captions. Companies would use your work as part of their digital marketing strategy. Alternatively, you could also start your own blog and, eventually, monetize it. Just know that will take more time than working for a company already looking for writers. 

To be successful as an online writer, it’s important to know that writing for the internet isn’t the same as writing an essay for school. So, make sure to check out the tutorial below if you’re interested in this job! 

Minimum age requirement: 14-18 years old, depending on the website

How much you can typically make: $10 – $35 per hour

Websites to find work: Freelancer, Upwork, Content Gather, ProBlogger 

Best tutorial:

#7 Proofreader 

No one likes finding typos in a piece of writing that’s already been published. That’s why businesses and individuals (e.g. other students) are often willing to pay decent money for people who can proofread things like blog posts, articles, brochures, and more.

Minimum age requirement: 16-18 years old, depending on the website

How much you can typically make: $10 – $30 per hour

Websites to find work: Freelancer, Upwork, ProBlogger 

Best tutorial: How To Become A Proofreader In 5 Simple Steps (With No Experience) 

#8 Review Music

You probably already listen to music daily. Well, you could turn that into a decent source of income if you’re willing to review and provide feedback to emerging music artists and producers. 

Your feedback helps those artists and commercial agencies improve the music they use before releasing it to wider audiences. For websites like PlaylistPush, you’ll need to meet certain requirements related to your activity and following on music streaming apps (e.g. Spotify).

Minimum age requirement: 13 years old

How much you can typically make: $0.02-$12 per song

Websites to find work: Current Reward, Slicethepie, PlaylistPush 

Best tutorial: 15 Best Ways to Get Paid to Listen to Music in 2021 

#9 Data Entry 

Data entry isn’t the most exciting online job you can have. But it’s pretty easy and something you can do while listening to your favorite music or podcasts! Basically, you just need to have an internet connection, fast typing skills, and the ability to input data accurately into spreadsheets and databases. 

Minimum age requirement: 16-18 years old depending on the website

How much you can typically make: $8 – $15 per hour

Websites to find work: Upwork, Fiverr

Best tutorial: 

#10 Review Phone Calls

You may not find this job to be wildly exciting either. But you can make good money helping customer service centers improve their services by listening to calls and reviewing the call quality.

To do this online job, you just need to have a good pair of headphones and the ability to provide detailed feedback on how a company might improve their customer service calls. 

Minimum age requirement: 16 years old

How much you can typically make: $1 – $4 per hour (Humanatic); $7 – $11 per hour (Reynolds & Reynolds)

Websites to find work: Humanatic, Reynolds & Reynolds

Best tutorial: Earn $11 Per Hour Reviewing Telephone Calls From Home 

#11 Voice Over Artist 

Ever wonder who is speaking over the ads that play on TV and YouTube? A voice over artist! As a voice over artist, you use voice to entertain, narrate, and/or market products. 

If you like reading out loud and have a quiet place in your house to do it, this could be a good part-time gig for you. 

Minimum age requirement: depends on the platform

How much you can make: $10 – $30 per hour

Websites to find work: Upwork, Voices, Fiverr

Best tutorial: How To Become a Voice-Over Artist: 5 Steps 

#12 Sell Original Products

If you’re really feeling entrepreneurial, this one’s for you! When you create and sell your own products, you’re essentially starting your own online business. What kind of things can you make and sell? Well, a few popular examples include handmade jewelry, artwork, and clothing items.

To get started, you’ll obviously need products to sell that you can produce regularly and a place to sell them. Use one of the websites below to get started! 

Minimum age requirement: No age limit 

How much you can typically make: Depends on the product margin

Websites to sell your work: eBay, Etsy, Amazon

Best tutorial: How To Sell Online in 2021

#13 Design and Sell Merchandise

If you want to sell things online but don’t want or know how to make your own products, don’t worry! You can easily design and create custom merchandise like t-shirts, tote bags, and phone cases using pre-made designs and templates. You’ll still need to do the work of marketing and advertising the products. But using this method, you don’t have to spend money on inventory. 

Minimum age requirement: No age limit 

How much you can typically make: Depends on the product margin

Websites to design your merchandise: Teespring, Printful  

Best tutorial: How To Start a Clothing Line With Printful (In 2021)

#14 Customer Service Representative

If you like talking to and helping people solve their problems, this could be a fulfilling online job for you. Companies will pay you to answer their customers’ questions and requests via phone, text, and email. 

Minimum age requirement: 16-18 years old, depending on the website 

How much you can typically make: $5 – $20 per hour

Websites to find work: Upwork, Fiverr 

Best tutorial: How to Snag (and Succeed at) a Remote Customer Service Job

#15 Virtual Assistant

Virtual assistants help small business owners perform tasks like email management, research, scheduling, and a whole lot more. The work is quite varied. But a lot of it can be learned quite quickly. This makes it a great online job for teens! 

Minimum age requirement: 13-18 years old, depending on the website

How much you can typically make: $5-$20 per hour

Websites to find work:  Upwork, Fiverr

Best tutorial:

#16 Test Products

Do you like trying out new products and telling your friends about them? You can do the same thing for market research firms and make money online! 

Before launching their products to the market, companies like to have potential consumers test them and provide feedback on things that can be improved. Not only will you get paid for testing the products, sometimes you get to keep them as well!

Minimum age requirement: No age limit

How much you can make: $3 – $500 per month

Websites to find work: Toluna, Product Report Card

Best tutorial: Get Paid to Test and Review Products at Home Free in 2022 

#17 Content Creator 

Thanks to the internet, you can make and profit off of original content about any of your interests in a variety of forms: videos, e-books, online courses, and more. You can also make that content for a business and get paid in the process. 

For this job, you’ll need to be creative. Depending on the type of content you create, you may also need to purchase some specialized software. But that’s definitely not a requirement.

Minimum age requirement: 13-18 years old, depending on the website

How much you can typically make: $10 – $30 per hour (if working for a company) 

Websites to find work: Fiverr, Upwork

Best tutorial: How to Become a Content Creator in 5 Simple Steps

#18 Brand Ambassador / Influencer

We’re sure you already know about one. But we do have to remind you that it isn’t as easy as you might think. Being a brand ambassador or influencer requires building a large following, regularly publishing engaging content in a certain niche, and finding brands to collaborate with. So, it takes some work. But, if you pull it off, it can be a pretty cool online job! 

Minimum age requirement: 13 years old

How much you can typically make: $15-$30 per hour

Best tutorial: Quick Guide to be a Teenfluencer 

#19 Test Apps

Did you know that many of the apps on your phone went through rounds of usability tests before making it to the App Store? Well, now you do! And you can make money by signing up to be one of the people that tests and reviews new apps. 

Minimum age requirement: 13 years old (18 years old for UserTesting)

How much you can typically make: $10 – $15 per test

Websites to find work: UserTesting, Testbirds, Userfeel

Best tutorial: 17 Sites That Will Pay You to Test Websites and Apps 

#20 Transcribe Video and Audio Clips

Some companies have tons of videos and audio files that they use for marketing or communications purposes. As a transcriber, your job is to accurately type what you hear so that they can do things like add subtitles or create written materials like blog posts. 

Minimum age requirement: 18 years old 

How much you can make: $0.2 – $1.1 per audio minute

Best website to find work: QA World, Rev, TranscribeMe, Fiverr, Upwork

Best tutorial: How To Become A Transcriptionist: Free Step-by-Step Guide For Beginners 

#21 Market Research 

If you’ve ever done research for a school project (we’re sure you have), then you can also make money online by doing market research. Companies would pay you to find information and synthesize data on topics related to their business. 

Minimum age requirement: 13 years old (Fiverr); 18 years old (Upwork)

How much you can typically make: $5 – $20 per hour

Best website to find work: Upwork, Fiverr

Best tutorial: How to Do Market Research: A Guide and Template 

#22 Review Ads 

Don’t expect to make a lot of money from this online job. But you probably already watch tons of ads a day on YouTube and TV. And it’s pretty simple. You just sign up for one of the websites below and receive rewards for watching ads in your spare time. 

Minimum age requirement: 13 years old

How much you can typically make: $5 – $100 per month

Best website to find work: AdWallet, InboxDollar, Swagbucks, MyPoints

Best tutorial: 10 Best Ways to Get Paid to Watch Ads 

#23 Photography 

Do you love taking photos? If so, you can take photos for businesses or individuals and get paid! On top of that, you can also take photos and sell them on stock photos websites for money.

Minimum age requirement: 18 years old

How much you can make: $1 – $20 per photo 

Websites to sell your photography: Adobe Stock, Shutter Stock, Foap, Alamy

Best tutorial: Sell Photos Online: 18 Websites for Selling Your Photography 

#24 Graphic Design 

As a graphic designer, your key responsibility is to create visual content, such as social media posts, or logos, for businesses or brands. If you know how to use design tools such as Adobe Illustrator or Canva, this could be a good way to earn decent money after school!

Minimum age requirement: 13-18 years old, depending on the platform

How much you can typically make: $10 – $30 per hour

Websites to find work: Freelancer, Upwork, Fiverr

Best tutorial:

Final Thoughts

There are so many ways to make money online – even as a teenager! Look more into one or two of the online jobs we’ve shared in this post to start making extra cash in your spare time outside of school!

And when you do start making money, be sure to also start learning about financial literacy.  This will help you save and spend your money wisely!

For more student-friendly finance tips be sure to check out the rest of our blog where we talk about topics like how to make an extra $500 a month, how to apply for scholarships and graduate college debt free!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
The cost of your college education can be intimidating. Which is why it’s important to understand your options for financial aid! This includes need-based financial aid. 

But what does “need-based” refer to? And how do you know if you qualify? Two good questions! And we’ll be answering them in this post! 

We’ll also look at the difference between need-based vs. merit-based financial aid (and how you can easily find more opportunities to win both types). But, before we do that, let’s quickly go over…

What Type of Financial Aid Is Need-Based?

Need-based financial aid can help you pay for college expenses like tuition, housing, and books. It includes:

Federal, State, and University Grants (including Pell grants)
Work Study
Subsidized Stafford Loans
Need-Based Scholarships
What are federal, state, and university grants?

Federal, state, and university grants are sources of financial aid that do not need to be paid back. 

Pell Grants are the largest federal student aid grant program and can provide up to $6,495 (for the 2021–22 academic year). Pell grants are specifically for undergraduate students whose income status demonstrates they’ll need extra support paying for college.

What is work study? 

Work study is need-based financial aid that allows undergraduate students to earn money to pay for college through a job. With a work study job, you can work up to 20 hours a week during the school year and full-time during college breaks, including the summer semester. All of your wages are paid for by the Department of Education.

What are subsidized Stafford loans?

Subsidized Stafford loans are one of your options for federal student loans. The federal government pays the interest for these student loans while you’re in school at least half time, in deferment, or forbearance.

What are need-based scholarships?

Need-based scholarships are scholarships that are specifically for students that come from low-income backgrounds. For example, the Gates Scholarship is a need-based scholarship for high school students.  

How to Know If You Qualify for Need-Based Financial Aid

To find out if you qualify for federal need-based financial aid (e.g. federal grants, work study, Stafford loans), you need to complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). 

If you’ve never done that, be sure to check out our step-by-step guide on how to apply for FAFSA.

When you complete your FAFSA application, you’ll receive a document called a Student Aid Report. On that report, you’ll see your Expected Family Contribution (EFC). 

The EFC will be used to determine your eligibility for need-based aid.  If your expected family contribution is low, there’s a good chance you’ll qualify for one or more types of need-based financial aid.

Also, be sure to apply as soon as possible! The best need-based financial aid packages (i.e. the packages with minimal student loans) typically go to the students who submit the FAFSA early.

What Are the Income Requirements for Need-Based Financial Aid?

As we mentioned above, you can also receive need-based financial aid from the college you attend. Usually, this aid will be given to you in the form of grants and scholarships. 

The requirements to qualify for need-based financial aid vary. Most colleges require your family to have an adjusted gross income of less than $50,000. 

However, some colleges offer need-based financial aid for families with incomes up to about $100,000. Check with the financial aid department for each college on your list to find out if you qualify.

Need-Based Aid vs. Merit-Based Aid. What’s the Difference?

Merit-based aid and need-based financial aid are often confused. But, as you probably know now after reading through this post, they’re quite different. 

Need-based financial aid refers to grants, work-study, federal loans, and scholarships designated for students from low-income backgrounds. 

Merit-based aid, on the other hand, refers to any scholarship that doesn’t depend on your income status. Anyone can qualify for merit-based aid. 

Where can you apply for merit-based aid?

Most colleges have merit scholarships. And when you apply for college, you’ll typically be considered for the college’s merit scholarships. But that doesn’t mean you’ll get one— even if you have an amazing high school transcript and top test scores. These college scholarships are usually limited and quite competitive. 

You can find additional merit-based aid opportunities by looking for private scholarships. For example, the National Merit Scholarship is a type of merit-based financial aid.

Key Takeaways

Need-based financial aid is any form of financial aid that is awarded to students who need financial support to attend college. The types of financial aid  that are need-based include:

Federal, state, and university grants (including the Pell Grant)
Work study jobs
Subsidized Stafford loans
Need-based scholarships

Your eligibility for need-based financial aid is determined after you apply for FAFSA. Be sure to do that early to get the best financial aid package! You can also receive merit-based financial aid from your college’s financial aid department and private scholarships.

To find need-based and merit-based scholarships, check out Scholly Search. It’s our college scholarship app that will help you find all of the scholarships you qualify for based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits!   

And for more tips on how to pay for college, check out the rest of our blog where we go in-depth on topics like how to apply for scholarships, choose the best student loan, and graduate debt free!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Scholarships are, undoubtedly, the best form of financial aid. They’re free money to pay for college! But you’re not alone if you’re discouraged from applying. Many scholarship competitions are really competitive since, often, only one or very few applicants can win…

But who says you can’t be one of those winners? We definitely think you can! Plus, there are things you can do to increase your odds of winning. And we’re going to show you how in this post on how to apply for scholarships!

Specifically, we’ll be sharing 15 expert tips on things you should do before and during the scholarship application season! But, before we get to those tips, we’ll first cover two common questions about scholarships.

When Is the Best Time to Start Applying for Scholarships?

Now. Yesterday. Tomorrow. Those are all good times to start. Seriously! And we say that because there are scholarship deadlines all throughout the year.

So, really the best time to begin applying for scholarships is as soon as you have time and before the deadlines of the scholarships you hope to win.

For some students, that will mean applying before the start of their senior year of high school. For others, that will mean after they’ve finished submitting college applications. And for everyone else, it will mean while they’re in college.

Our point? It’s never too late!

Who Is Eligible for College Scholarships?

You and most (if not all) of your classmates are eligible to apply for scholarships! And that’s because scholarships are available for pretty much every type of student.

We’ll be sharing more on that later on. For now, we just want to make sure you know that you don’t have to be a straight A student, the captain of your high school football team, or anything other than what you are now to win scholarships.

But you do need to know how to find the right scholarships for you. And you need to know how to put together an application that gives you a real shot at winning. So, let’s now turn to our expert tips!

15 Expert Tips on How to Win College Scholarships

Now that we’ve got those common questions out of the way, let’s dive into our top tips on how to apply for scholarships!

1. Create a List of Your Unique Traits

Did you know that there’s a scholarship out there for practically everything?

Scholarships are available for students based on nationality, personal interests, GPA, languages spoken, extra curricular activities, and so on! There are scholarships for swimmers, pianists, fantasy football players, students who grew up with certain hardships, first-generation college students, LGBTQ individuals… you get the picture!

And here’s the key. The students who get the most money don’t apply to all of those scholarships. They find ones that fit them so that they can submit an application that makes them look like the perfect applicant!

That’s why we recommend that you start by making a list of all of your unique traits. You might be really surprised by the number of scholarships out there that fit your individual skills and qualities, so don’t leave anything off!

(If you’re not sure where to begin, sign up for Scholly and answer our scholarship-matching questions. We’ll help identify your unique traits and find scholarships that match!)

You can start with this list of traits about who you are, including:

Personal interests and passions
Extracurricular activities
Hardships you or your family have endured (e.g. cancer, loss of a parent, a natural disaster, etc.)
Career interests or goals
Academic accomplishments
Heritage and community
Sex/gender
Personality traits (e.g. strong sense of leadership, great sense of humor)
University you currently attend or the universities you’re applying to
2. Search for Scholarships Based On These Traits

Once you’ve got your list of unique traits handy, you can start your scholarship search! There are literally tens of thousands of scholarships for college out there. Many are easy to find, such as popular, high-competition scholarships like the Gates Millennium Scholars Program and the Ronald McDonald House Charities Scholarship.

Specialized scholarships and those with less competition are usually harder to find. So, you’ll want to be extremely diligent in your research. Don’t be afraid to ask teachers, counselors, and current college students for advice.

But, also, do yourself a favor and use a scholarship search tool like Scholly! As we mentioned, it can help you find all of the scholarships you’re eligible for, including those with less competition.

3. Develop a Prioritized List of Scholarship Opportunities

As you’re searching for scholarships, keep a list that prioritizes opportunities based on several factors:

The scholarship deadlines
What makes you a unique fit for the scholarship
The amount of money you can win

Everyone’s list will look a little different. But the goal is to apply for all of the best scholarships in a timely manner.

When it comes to prioritizing scholarships, don’t discount what seems like a huge, too-good-to-be-true scholarship, assuming you’ll never win it. Go big or go home, right?

For example, at Scholly, we frequently offer HUGE scholarship and student loan payoff opportunities that are extremely easy to apply for! High dollar scholarships, like the Coca-Cola scholarship, are often competitive. But it can’t hurt to try for them because there are always winners.

On the other hand, don’t dismiss smaller college scholarships either! There are tons of scholarships out there in the $500-$2,000 range. This may not seem like a lot, but every dollar counts and these scholarships add up!

4. Implement a Scholarship Schedule

It may sound obvious, but you should apply for as many scholarships as possible! Don’t skimp.

Searching and applying for scholarships should be a regular part of your college preparation routine, much like standardized test prep. Carve out time to dedicate solely to scholarship applications. You can even consider making a scholarship schedule.

For example, every Monday, dedicate an hour to search for scholarships and make a list of the best ones. Then, every Wednesday, dedicate an hour to apply for a scholarship on your list. Choose what works best for you and stick to it. We’re all busy, but if you make time to apply for scholarships, you’ll be thankful later! 

We highly recommend that you apply to 10 scholarships per month to drastically increase your chances of winning. If this sounds overwhelming, think of it this way: that’s only 2-3 scholarship applications a week. The more you apply for, the greater your chances of winning.

And, by the way, there are plenty of college scholarships out there that are easy to apply for. Some scholarship applications take as little as 15 minutes! In your schedule, try to stagger shorter and longer applications.

5. Build a Scholarship “Toolbox” (And Save Time Later)

What, you might ask, is a scholarship toolbox? Basically, it’s just all of the resources and knowledge you’ll need to slay the scholarship application process!

By gathering all of the (potentially) necessary items and information you’ll need for scholarship applications ahead of time, you’ll be able to crank them out in less time.

The items you’ll need for your toolbox include:

Personal information (name, address, email address, your parents’/guardians’ information and employers, etc.)
All of your school’s information (name, address, your graduation year, the 6-digit high school code, etc.)
Most recent transcripts (high school and/or college)
Letters of recommendation from 1-2 teachers
Scholarship essays you’ve written in the past
Parents’ most recent federal tax return
Completed FAFSA and SAR report (which is generated after you complete the FAFSA)
Your student loan lender information (if you’ve already taken out student loans)
A recent, non-blurry photo of just you (think “headshot” style from shoulders up and without your friends in the frame)

Will you need ALL of this information for every scholarship? Not likely. But the idea is to gather all of these resources and documents ahead of time so that if you do need them, you won’t lose time searching for them.

6. Don’t Rush Your Scholarship Applications!

Make sure you’re giving each application the necessary time and consideration. You want your application to reflect your ability to be thoughtful and hard-working. 

Taking the appropriate time to apply for scholarships involves:

Reading all directions (including fine print) thoroughly
Familiarizing yourself with the organizations offering the scholarships
Reflecting thoughtfully on any essay questions
Writing a strong scholarship essay, if applicable (more on this shortly)
7. Track Your Scholarship Applications 

The more organized you are, the better. And if you’re applying for a lot of scholarships (as we recommend) then organization is key.

Scholly Search allows you to save upcoming scholarships, stay on top of due dates, and keep track of the scholarships you’ve applied for (including your wins!). But a spreadsheet also works well.

Whatever your preferred method, keeping a master list of scholarships and tracking them ensures that you won’t miss out on any great opportunities. It also helps with college budgeting, since you can see how much you’ve earned and how much you’ll still have to cover.

8. Follow The Directions to a Tee

Are you required to provide your GPA? Letters of recommendation? A photo of just your face? A 250-word essay on your involvement with community organizations? Then do precisely that! Don’t deviate from the scholarship’s guidelines and risk being disqualified for a silly reason.

It sounds obvious. But it’s so important to make sure you submit everything necessary and show that you meet the eligibility requirements. Before submitting each scholarship application, triple check the requirements!

9. Always Do The “Optional” Work

Okay, listen, no one really wants MORE work to do, we get it. But if a scholarship has any “optional” requirements (e.g. an essay, a letter of recommendation, a joke—yep, that’s something that’s actually come up before on an application) we urge you to consider it “mandatory” and do it. 

Here’s why: completing the additional work shows your initiative and drive. It will also make your application stand out from other students who perhaps didn’t provide the extra materials. Go above and beyond!

10. Write a Killer Scholarship Essay

Ah, the scholarship essay. Not all scholarships require one. But many do. And this is really your chance to shine! Your essay allows you to show the more dimensional aspects of yourself—things that can’t be reflected in just your GPA or test scores. 

This is our complete checklist for how to write a scholarship essay. It’s full of pretty much everything you need to know about writing the best scholarship essay possible!

Here are some highlights…

Stick to the prompt

Answer the specific prompt at hand as clearly and concisely as possible. If the prompt asks about a time you achieved something despite a setback, don’t write about what you’ll do with the scholarship money if you win. If you’re asked to discuss what you want to study in college and why, don’t write about the day your baby sister was born (unless that directly pertains to your college and career goals!).

You don’t have to repeat the prompt or question in your essay. But you do need to stick to the subject at hand, stay focused, and follow the character or word count.

Tell a story with your essay

Your essay can have a traditional introduction-body-conclusion format like many of the essays you’ve probably written in school. But it doesn’t have to be quite as academic.

Keep it professional, of course. No cursing, “text speak,” or highly controversial stances is usually a good rule of thumb. But also make sure to paint a vivid picture for the reader by showing not telling.

For example, if you’re describing how the scholarship could change your future for the better (a fairly common scholarship prompt), avoid cliches and platitudes like, “it would mean the world to me to win” or “winning would be a real game-changer.” The essay readers know this!

Instead, try to describe what life would look like for you with the financial assistance, being as specific as possible. For instance, you could say something like:

“This scholarship will allow me to take an unpaid internship at a community veterinary clinic where I can help care for sick and wounded animals. This would be an important step in preparing me to reach my goal of becoming a veterinarian.”

In other words, try to be precise, providing the readers a clear picture of your passions and aspirations.

Don’t just repeat your resume

Instead of just listing your academic accomplishments (boring) show the readers something new about you! The idea is to provide another layer of who you are as a candidate. This is particularly important if you’re also including your resume with your application.

Proofread and polish your essay!

Listen, it’s ALWAYS a good idea to get another set of eyes on your written work to help you catch any content or style errors. So share your essays with a trusted friend, parent, or teacher for feedback before submitting the application.

No matter what, even when you think your essay is ready for submission, proofread it one last time before sending it off. It would be a huge bummer to miss out on some free money because of a typo!

“Recycle” your essays

While every essay prompt will be a little different, many of the same themes and topics will repeat. For example, essay prompts will often ask you to discuss an accomplishment of which you are proud or to discuss your academic and career goals.

Because of this, it’s good to have a “template” essay that you can essentially re-use for more than one prompt. You’ll likely have to make small tweaks to it each time. But if it’s strong to begin with, you can likely “recycle” it for multiple scholarship applications.

11. Don’t Wait Until The Last Minute

We recommend that both high school students and college students start applying as early as possible for scholarships. Why? For one, some scholarships do prioritize early applications.

For example, the foundation that awards the Burger King Scholarship only accepts 50,000 applications per year — even if that means they receive all of those applications before the deadline.

And even if you don’t get bonus points for applying early, you’ll give yourself enough time to make sure there are no glitches with your scholarship application. We’ve all waited until the last minute to submit something online only to find out the website is down or there are other “technological difficulties.”

Plus, if you apply early you won’t be rushed and you’ll deliver your best work. And you’ll free up more time to apply for more scholarships!

12. Beware of Scholarship Scams

Scholarships exist to GIVE you free money to help pay for college, not to take your money! So, if you see an application asking for a “submission fee,” look elsewhere!

Additionally, bold claims like “you’ve been pre-selected” or “it’s guaranteed or your money back” are evidence of shady business.

Here’s an article with more information on how to avoid scholarship scams. But the gist is that any REAL application will not ask you to pay money.

13. Clean Up Your Public Social Media 

Okay, this is a biggie. Just like prospective employers, scholarship committee members will often vet their candidates. So, make sure your social media doesn’t give them any doubts.

In fact, many scholarships for college actually ask for a link to a social media profile (sometimes of your choice, sometimes not). So, make sure you also provide a working, accessible link.

14. Check Your Spam Folder

You’ll likely be notified by email if you win scholarships. So, be on the lookout for updates. We all know that important mail can get stuck in the good ol’ spam folder though, so make sure to check that regularly too.

15. Don’t Give Up! Scholarships Are Life-Changing and Worth the Effort

This is perhaps the most important of all the scholarship winning tips. Realistically, you’ll face some rejection. That’s okay! College is expensive and some scholarships are competitive. But just keep applying! That scholarship award money is bound to rack up eventually.

BONUS Tip: Scholarships Are Not a One-Time Deal

Many students don’t know this but you can keep applying for scholarships even once you’re in college. That’s right… you can apply for scholarships for years and keep getting more free financial aid to pay for college.

In fact, the students who win the most scholarships typically apply every semester. Obviously, it’s ideal to get a jump start on applications before the school year starts (especially if it’s your senior year of high school), but huge sums of money are available throughout the year.

Final Thoughts

When it comes to paying for college, there is no better form of financial aid than scholarships. It’s basically free money! Plus, pretty much everyone is eligible for at least one scholarship! But you need to know how to find the right ones for you, the ones you have a real shot at winning.

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds of thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics related to college financial aid, like how to apply for FAFSA, how to get a student loan, and how to win other scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
With over 100 questions, the FAFSA application process can feel long and tedious! On top of that, you also need to spend time gathering all the required documents, like last year’s tax reports, bank statements, and W-2s.

If any of that’s new information, you may want to start with our 2021-2022 guide on how to apply for FAFSA. 

But what happens after you finally get it done? Is your FAFSA processed instantly, giving you an exact amount of how much financial aid you’ll receive? Not quite. 

In fact, it can take several months from the day you press “Submit” to the day you receive your financial aid award letter. Why? Good question! And we’ll be answering it in this blog post along with 4 things you can do if you don’t get enough financial aid. Let’s get right into it! 

After You Send in Your FAFSA Form, What Will You Receive Back?

So, you’ve just completed your FAFSA. Now what? Is there anything else you need to do to apply for financial aid? Yes, there might be. Let’s walk through exactly what happens so you know what to expect.

#1 You Receive Your Student Aid Report

After you submit your FAFSA, the first thing you should look for is your Student Aid Report (SAR). Your SAR is a comprehensive report that breaks down: 

What types of federal student loans and grants you qualify for 
Your Expected Family Contribution (EFC) 

If it’s your first time applying for FAFSA, you might not know what an EFC is. So, let’s explain. Your EFC is how much you and your family are expected to pay out of pocket for your education. The exact number will depend on the financial information you shared while filling out the FAFSA.  

You’ll want to review your Student AId Report as soon as you get it. Why? Because you’ll want to make sure no errors have been made and that it shows you’re eligible for a sufficient amount of aid before it’s processed by your college’s financial aid department. 

#2 Your Selected Colleges Receive and Process Your FAFSA Results

If you’re an incoming freshman, all of the financial aid departments at the colleges you’ve listed on your FAFSA will receive a copy of your SAR. If you’re a current college student, just your current college will get your SAR. 

Either way, the college will use that information to determine your eligibility for college scholarships, grants, work study, or federal student loans. Even then, you won’t receive their financial aid decision until months later— if at all. 

#3 You Receive a Financial Aid Package from the Colleges That Offer You Admission

If you’re a current college student, you should expect to get your financial aid award letter for the next school year before the end of the current school year. If you haven’t received it by then, contact your school’s financial aid department ASAP. 

If you’re a high school senior about to become an incoming freshman, you’ll receive a financial aid award package after you receive your college acceptance letters. 

Often, the financial aid letter gets sent separately from your admissions letter. But you should always receive it before you need to make an official admissions decision. That way you can compare the financial aid you’re offered from different colleges. 

Now, the process of filing FAFSA and receiving financial aid isn’t perfect. And it’s definitely possible that you won’t get offered enough to cover all of your college expenses. So, what should you do?  

What To Do If You Don’t Get Enough Financial Aid

If you receive your financial aid package and know that it’s still not enough to cover your chosen college’s cost of attendance, don’t give up. Here are 4 things you can do if you don’t get enough financial aid.

Appeal Your Financial Aid Award Letter

Mistakes happen. So, if you feel your college’s financial aid department hasn’t offered you enough aid, try submitting an appeal letter. To do that, you’ll need to write and send a letter that describes why you deserve more aid. 

There could be a variety of reasons for you to write an appeal. But the ones that have the highest likelihood of getting approved usually involve changes to you and your family’s financial situation since submitting the FAFSA. For example, if one of your parents recently lost their job, you might be eligible for more aid.  Just keep in mind that there’s no guarantee that your college will approve your appeal.

Contact Your College’s Financial Aid Department

If you’re worried you don’t have a good enough case for an appeal, try directly contacting your college’s financial aid department to explain your situation. This method isn’t guaranteed either. But it’s worth a shot! 

In some cases, the financial aid department might have leftover aid from students who decided to attend a different college. They might also let you know about new campus scholarships or other funding opportunities you can pursue. 

Apply for Scholarships

You’ll get your financial aid package after the deadline for many popular scholarship applications. But that doesn’t mean all hope is lost! There are still tons of other scholarships that have deadlines throughout the year. 

Oh, and if you think scholarships are just for high school students and incoming freshmen, you’re wrong! There are also scholarships specifically for current college students. 

If you need help finding those scholarships, check out Scholly Search. It’s our scholarship app that will show you all of the scholarships you qualify for based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

Take Out Private Student Loans

If you can’t get enough money from scholarships and federal aid (including federal student loans), then you may need to consider private student loans.

Obviously, this isn’t the ideal scenario. Private student loans don’t always have the most attractive interest rates or repayment terms. But that doesn’t mean it isn’t possible to find one you’re happy with. 

If you’re not sure where to start, read our in-depth guide on how to take out a student loan. 

Key Takeaways

Completing the FAFSA is the best way to maximize your financial aid. Typically, it takes a few months to get your financial aid package after submitting the FAFSA. 

In some cases, you’ll get offered enough aid to cover your college costs. But, unfortunately, it’s also possible that you won’t. 

What should you do if you don’t get enough financial aid? Try one or more of the options we’ve shared in this post! As a quick reminder, you can: 

Appeal your financial aid award letter 
Contact your college’s financial aid department
Apply for scholarships 
Take out private student loans 

For more tips on how to pay for college, be sure to check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics like how to make extra money as a college student, how to start building credit, and how to find a job that offers tuition reimbursement. Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’re like most people with student loan debt, student loan forgiveness programs sound like a dream. These programs offer the possibility of having some or all of your federal student loans completely forgiven. In other words, you won’t have to pay them back! 

Pretty exciting, right? Absolutely! 

BUT, unfortunately, many people find applying for these programs to be a bit tricky and overly confusing. That’s why we’ve decided to give you all the facts and information you need about student loan forgiveness programs in this blog post! 

Here’s what we’ll cover: 

What to know about Joe Biden’s October 2021 update to the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program
What to do if you qualify for the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program
Who qualifies for other student loan forgiveness programs
3 ways to manage or reduce your student loan debt without loan forgiveness programs

But before we get into those topics, let’s quickly go over some quick facts.

Quick Facts About Student Loan Forgiveness Programs

Student loan forgiveness:

typically refers to the forgiveness of federal student loans. If you’ve taken out private student loans, it’s harder to qualify for student loan forgiveness, though some companies and organizations do offer it
is subject to tight parameters and restrictions. For instance, you usually have to work in a specific profession for a certain number of years before becoming eligible;
is different from student loan discharge, which is the elimination of student loan debt on account of very extenuating circumstances such as death, bankruptcy, or school closure. You may also be eligible for a total and permanent disability discharge (TPD) if you have a permanent disability; 
differs from deferment and forbearance, which are other ways of pausing and postponing your payments on account of certain life circumstances
What to Know About Joe Biden’s October 2021 Update to Student Loan Forgiveness Programs 

Have you heard of the Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) program? For a long time, this program was seen as a complete failure. Even if you were eligible, it was likely that, for one reason or another, the Department of Education would reject your application. 

The Biden administration has recently decided to change that. On October 6, 2021, the administration made changes to the PSLF program, making it easier for people to apply and get their applications for loan forgiveness approved. 

So far, the changes to the program have led to the elimination of $1.7 billion of debt for 22,000 borrowers. And the administration has estimated that an additional 27,000 borrowers could have around $2.8 billion of debt eliminated if they can prove they’re eligible. 

Who’s Eligible for the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program?  

You’re eligible for this program if you:

Have been or were previously employed full-time in a public sector job for a qualifying employer at least 10 years
Have student debt from Direct Loans (or consolidate your loans into a Direct Loan)
Have made 120 qualifying payments 

Normally, you’d also need to have made all of your qualifying payments under an income-driven repayment plan. But, in an effort to restore the program, the Biden administration has waived this requirement until October 2022.

The definition of a public sector job isn’t 100% clear, but it typically applies to professions in the following fields:

Public Education 
Public Safety (e.g. law enforcement, firefighting, disaster response, etc.)
Non-Profits (e.g. Americorps, Peace Corps, Teach for America)
Government (federal, state, local, and tribal)
Military

But, according to the Office of Federal Student Aid, what matters most is that your current or past employer falls under one of two categories: 

Government organizations at any level (U.S. federal, state, local, or tribal) – this includes the U.S. military
Not-for-profit organizations that are tax-exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code
What to Do If You Qualify for the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program

If you qualify for the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program, we recommend applying ASAP. After October 2022, the requirements for eligible borrowers will likely become stricter. 

To apply, go to the Department of Education Office of Federal Student Aid website and submit a PSLF form to your loan provider.

Who Qualifies for Other Student Loan Forgiveness Programs

The Public Service Loan Forgiveness program isn’t your only option. You may also qualify to get some of your debt forgiven if…

You’re a public school teacher

The Teacher Loan Forgiveness Program forgives up to $17,500 of your (unsubsidized and subsidized) federal student loans. To be eligible, you must teach for 5 consecutive years at a low-income public school or work 5 consecutive years at an educational service agency. You must also be considered a highly qualified teacher.  

What’s great is that public school teachers are eligible for the Teacher Loan Forgiveness Program and the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program, so feel free to apply for both programs if you meet the criteria! 

Here are some other key eligibility requirements for teachers looking to apply for the Teacher Loan Forgiveness program:

Of your 5 consecutive, full-time years of teaching, only one year may be prior to the 1997-1998 academic school year.
You must have been employed at a low-income elementary school, secondary school, or educational service agency.
The loans in consideration for forgiveness must have been taken out before the end of your 5 consecutive years of teaching. 

Also, please note that under certain circumstances, you may be eligible for the Teacher Loan Forgiveness program even if you have only completed 4 consecutive, full-time years of teaching. In this case, the 5th, partial year of teaching may be considered eligible if:

Your completed at least half of the academic year of teaching, AND
Your employer confirms that you have fulfilled your contractual obligations for the year, AND
You were unable to complete the year for one of several approved reasons including: returning to post-secondary education, possessing a condition included in the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, or serving active service duty.
You’re a Nurse or Doctor

Like teachers, these professions are included in the PSLF program, but also have their own forgiveness programs as well. Here’s a complete list of student loan forgiveness programs and options.

Student Loan Forgiveness for Nurses

This is a highly comprehensive overview of student loan forgiveness options for nurses by each state. But the Nurse Corps Student Loan Repayment Program (LRP) is the most popular, and has the following eligibility requirements:

You must be a registered nurse or an advanced practice registered nurse.
You must work in a critical shortage facility or an accredited school of nursing.
Your loans must have been directly applied to cover the cost of nursing school or living expenses during nursing school.
You may have any of the following loans to apply: Stafford, Grad PLUS, Consolidation loans, Perkins, or other private loans 

Here is a complete guide to the Nurse Corps LRP. 

There are also other types of student loan forgiveness for nurses as well, including the National Health Service Corps which provides financial aid to those who want to work as health care providers in high-need communities. If you’ve taken out federal Perkins loans, you may also be eligible for a partial Perkins loan cancellation. 

Student Loan Forgiveness for Doctors and other Healthcare Professionals

We love this guide to student loan forgiveness for doctors and other healthcare professionals, but here are some essential things to know:

The National Health Service Corps (NHSC) loan repayment program awards up to $50,000 to licensed health care providers who commit to working 2+ years at an eligible location.
The Students to Service program provides up to $120,000 of loan forgiveness to students in their last year of medical service who agree to work at an approved location for 3+ years.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) loan repayment program provides up to $35,000 in assistance to those medical professionals in research-based careers in exchange for 2+ years of research at a qualifying not for profit organization.
You’re a Lawyer 

This is one of the best, to-the-point overviews of student loan forgiveness for lawyers, but the most common program is the Department of Justice Attorney Student Loan Repayment Program. 

Here are some key facts about the Department of Justice Attorney Student Loan Repayment Program:

This program for brand new lawyers, starts in spring, and requires 3+ years of working full-time for the Department of Justice. 
In exchange for this work, you’ll receive up to $6,000 toward your student loan debt.
You must have $10,000 or more in student loans (includes Stafford Loans, PLUS loans, Perkins loans, and others).
Payments from this program to your loan servicer are considered taxable income.
This is a highly competitive program, but that shouldn’t discourage you from applying!  
You’re in the Military 

Again, people in the US military can qualify for the PSLF program and various other forgiveness programs, including the Army Student Loan: Active Duty repayment program. 

There are also programs specifically geared toward members of the US Navy. This is a fantastically comprehensive guide to military student loan forgiveness that we highly recommend.   

Keep in mind that this list is in no way exhaustive, and that there may be other options for you out there. Here’s a resource we love that provides a complete list of student loan forgiveness programs and options out there currently. 

How to Manage or Reduce Your Student Loan Debt Without Student Loan Forgiveness 

If you’re not a candidate for any of the student loan forgiveness programs we mentioned above, there are few other routes you can take to manage or reduce your student loan debt.

#1 Pursue Income-Driven Loan Repayment

Income-driven student loan repayment allows you to make lower monthly payments if your current student loan payments are a substantial amount of your monthly income. 

The idea behind income-driven repayment plans is that if you still have a remaining balance after the terms of repayment (typically 20-25 years), your debt will be forgiven. 

Here are a few types of income-based student loan repayment options:

Revised Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (REPAYE) 

With REPAYE, your monthly payments are generally about 10% of your discretionary income (income after taxes), divided by 12 months. These payments are also based on adjusted gross income (AGI), your family size, and your total federal student loan balance.

It’s also important to note that REPAYE is only applicable for Direct Loans. Other loan programs aren’t eligible.

Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (PAYE)

The terms for PAYE are the same as those for REPAYE, but you must be a new borrower as of October 1, 2007. You must also have received a Direct Loan disbursement by October 1, 2011. A “new borrower” refers to someone who does not have an outstanding balance on a Direct Loan or FFEL Loan. 

Income-Based Repayment Plan (IBR) 

IBR is a repayment plan with monthly payments of about 15% of your discretionary income, divided by 12. Rates can go as low as 10% for new borrowers.

IBR is available to those with Direct Loans or FFEL loans. All other loan programs are ineligible.

Income-Contingent Repayment Plan (ICR Plan) 

The ICR plan provides monthly payments that are the lesser of either 1) your fixed monthly payment over 12 years, based on your income, OR 2) 20% of your discretionary income, divided by 12.

Please note that this plan is the only one available to borrowers with parent PLUS loans. It’s also important to understand that parents with PLUS loans can’t repay them under any of the income-driven repayment plans BUT they may consolidate their PLUS loans into a Direct Consolidation Loan and then make these payments under ICR.

Other things to know about Income-Driven repayment plans:

You can’t apply if you have any defaulted loans.
There is NO FEE to apply for IDRs. 
You will need to recertify your income each year.
If your income changes, you can submit new information and re-calculate your payments.
You may switch from one payment plan to another (provided you meet all of the eligibility requirements).
You will need an FSA ID to complete this process, which you can get here.
You will need to supply personal information including: your permanent address, your email address, your phone number, and the best time to reach you.
You will need to supply your financial information including your AGI (which you can automatically upload using a linked tool from the IRS or enter manually)

You can also make signing up for an Income-Driven Repayment plan incredibly easy by using Scholly Payoff! 

#2 Work for a Company That Provides Student Loan Repayment Assistance as an Employee Benefit

These days, many companies are starting to include student loan repayment as an employee benefit. This is an amazing way to get a substantial amount of debt relief. 

Here are some of the top companies that currently offer student loan repayment as a benefit:

Aetna

This insurance company matches full-time employees’ student loan payments for up to $2,000 a year (up to $10,000 total). Part-time employees can receive matching payments of $1,000 a year, or up to $5,000 total. 

Live Nation 

Event promoting company Live Nation matches up to $100 a month in student loan payments and up to $6,000 in total repayment.

Fidelity Investments

Employees who have been with the company for 6+ months are eligible to receive up to $2,000 in student loan repayment a year, and up to $10,000 total.

Nvidia

This tech company offers both full-time and part-time employees up to $6,000 a year and up to $30,000 total in student loan repayments! To be eligible, you must be employed at Nvidia for a minimum of 3 months and must have graduated college within 3 years of joining.

Chegg

This education tech company provides up to $1,000 a year to both full and part time employees toward student loan payments. The best part of this arrangement is that there is no cap on how much Chegg will provide over the years.

CommonBond

This lending and refinancing company provides its employees up to $100 per month for student loan repayment. There is also no reimbursement limit!

SoFi

This personal finance company offers employees up to $200 per month with no annual cap on loan reimbursement. One of the pioneers of employer student loan repayment programs, they’ve provided over $1 billion in student loan refinancing. 

Estée Lauder

The famed beauty product company, and all brands under it, provides employees up to $100 a month to pay off student loans, and up to $10,000 total.

Abbott

Abbott Laboratories, a pharmaceutical company, is committed to helping employees pay off their student loans AND save for the future. If you contribute 2% of your check to pay for student loans, Abbot will pay a 5% match to your 401k savings!

First Republic Bank

First Republic Bank, based in San Francisco, owns a start-up called Gradifi that specifically helps employers provide their employees with student loan assistance—and therefore helps its employees do the same. First Republic pays up to $100 a month during the first year of employment, $150 during the second, and $200 a month from that point on until the debt is fully paid.

Hulu 

You likely know Hulu from streaming TV shows and movies on it, but they’re also gaining a reputation for matching up to $1,200 a year in student loan repayment per year to employees.

Penguin Random House

Penguin is the first publishing company to offer its employees student loan reimbursement, offering up to $1,200 a year (and $9,000 total) to any full-time employee who has been with Penguin a year or more.

Carvana

Online used car retailer Carvana will pay up to $1,000 a year of employees student loans, and as of right now, there is no cap on repayment.

Peloton

The makers of one of the hottest selling stationary bikes on the market are now partnering with Gradifi to offer employees up to $100 monthly to pay off student loan expenses, with no current maximum repayment.

PwC

This massive accounting firm offers employees up to $1,200 a year in repayment assistance with a maximum cap of $10,000.

Similar to student loan repayment, many of those companies also offer tuition reimbursement or tuition assistance programs. How is this different from loan forgiveness? Well, sometimes it’s not, and the wording is just different. 

But sometimes “tuition reimbursement” refers to the repayment of all or some of the cost of college if you’re attending college and working. Employers are especially likely to offer this assistance if your schooling directly improves your ability to do the job you were hired to do, or helps you advance at the company.

Want to find more jobs with this type of education assistance? Here’s our list of 50 companies that offer tuition reimbursement! 

#3 Apply for Student Loan Payoff Programs

There are some awesome student loan payoff programs out there. As we’re sure you can imagine, they can be quite competitive. But, hey, you can’t win if you don’t apply! 

At Scholly, we regularly run student loan payoff contests. Check out all of our exciting opportunities here! 

Final Thoughts

Student loan forgiveness programs can be tremendously helpful if you qualify. Use the information we’ve shared in this post to find and apply for the right program for you. 

And if you don’t qualify for any of those programs, you might want to: 

Pursue an Income-Driven Repayment Plan (Scholly PayOff can help you sign up quickly!)
Find an employer that provides student loan repayment assistance as an employee benefit
Apply for student loan payoff programs 

Of course, if you’re in good financial standing, you may also choose to work toward paying off your student loans on your own. In which case, be sure to check out our guide on how to pay off student loans fast! 

What about if you’re having trouble paying your loans? In that case, check out our post on what to do if you can’t pay your student loans. Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Quick note: If you want to skip ahead and start building credit with no credit check and no hard pull, sign up for Self today!

If you have a low credit score, you’re far from alone. Most people start their adult lives with no credit history, which is a real problem because you need a credit history to do a lot of important things like rent an apartment, buy a car, get better rates on your student loans, or start a new cell phone contract. 

But, to be honest, building credit for the first time is confusing! You have to have an existing credit history to be approved for a new line of credit…but you can’t build your credit history if no one is willing to give you a line of credit…

Does that make sense to you? Maybe not. But don’t worry! In this guide, we’ll be answering common questions you might have about credit, like: 

What determines your credit score?
Where can you get official credit reports for free?
What’s the average credit score for someone your age? 
How long does it take to build credit? 

We’ll also be sharing seven of the best and fastest ways to build credit! After reading, you’ll have a clear idea of what you can do to improve your financial future by taking simple steps. 

But, if you’re wondering why any of this matters in the first place, you’re also not alone. So, let’s start by clearing up that doubt before diving into everything else!

Why Is It Important to Have a Good Credit Score?

Having a good credit score is important because it’s the basis for your financial future. If you have a good credit score, you’ll have access to the best rates, terms, and conditions for things like auto loans, credit cards, and apartment leases. Just using your student loans as an example, you could save THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS every year by having a good credit score.

Why? Because lenders will trust you can pay them back and because of that, charge you less interest. A bad credit score, on the other hand, will have the opposite effect.

So, how do you get a good credit score? Well, it doesn’t happen by accident. Your score is calculated according to 5 factors.

What All Goes Into a Credit Score? 

Credit bureaus calculate your credit score by looking at 5 factors: 

Your payment history (how often you make on-time payments for your bills) 
Your credit utilization (how much credit you owe relative to how much credit you have available to spend)
Your credit history (how long you’ve had one or more credit lines)
Your credit mix (how many types of credit— car loans, student loans, credit cards, etc. —you have) 
Your new credit (how many new credit lines you’ve recently opened)

Source

Where Can You Check Your Credit Score Accurately Online? 

There are a number of websites that give you free credit score reports, but they aren’t always accurate. A common place to get your score is directly from the three credit bureaus that give you an official score:

TransUnion
Experian
Equifax

Those credit agencies will charge you a fee to check your score. But you can also get a free report from each of the three credit bureaus one time per year by visiting  AnnualCreditReport.com. 

Is there any other way to check your credit score for free? Yep! For example, you can use a service like Credit Karma, which lets you check and monitor your credit for free as many times as you want. If you have a bank account or credit card, you might also be able to request a free report from your bank.

None of these alternative options are as accurate as the official scores you’d get from the three credit bureaus, but they usually come pretty close.

What Is the Average Credit Score for Young Adults?

There are two main models to score your credit: FICO and VantageScore. Under both models, the highest credit score you can get is 850. But, as a beginner building credit, no one expects you to have a perfect credit score! 

According to Value Penguin, the average credit score for people aged 18-23 is 674. This would be considered a “Good” credit score on the FICO model: 

800 to 850 – Exceptional
740 to 799 – Very Good
670 to 739 – Good
580 to 669 – Fair
300 to 579 – Very Poor

If you’ve never opened a line of credit and your starting score falls in the “Fair” or “Very Poor” range, speak with a financial professional. There could be an error on your credit report or you might be a victim of credit card fraud. 

How Long Does It Take to Establish Credit?

The average time frame to build credit from scratch for someone in their 20s is around two years. It takes around two years because you need to have at least one year of credit history and a few accounts with established payment history. 

But there are a few things you can do to speed up the process a bit… 

7 of the Best Ways to Build Credit as a Beginner

As a college student or recent grad, building credit will take time, patience, and consistency! But here are 7 easy ways to build your credit score: 

#1 Get a credit card that helps rebuild your credit

The only way to improve your credit is by getting credit, which becomes a catch-22 because often this leads to first-time credit mistakes, which can drive your credit down. This is not what you want.  

Luckily, there are now tech companies stepping up to actually help those in need of building credit. Our favorite company is Self, which can establish a positive payment history with all 3 credit bureaus, with no credit check or hard pull. 

When you have an active Credit Builder Account* and meet their eligibility criteria, you may receive an offer for the secured Self Visa ® Credit Card** that you can use to build your credit! Amazing!

#2 Become an authorized user on a family member’s credit card 

Becoming an authorized user is a great way to build credit if you have someone in your family that will allow it. Why? Because if you become an authorized user, you get to take advantage of that person’s credit history. It’s also pretty easy! 

To make you an authorized user, your family member just needs to contact the credit card issuer by phone or through the credit card’s online platform. They’ll also need your name, address, date of birth, and social security number.

#3 Apply for a credit-builder loan 

A credit builder loan is a loan that’s designed for people who don’t have a high enough score to qualify for traditional financing options. These types of loans typically offer lower interest rates and more manageable monthly payments. And since you’ll have less trouble making payments, this can really speed up your progress towards building good credit!

Where can you get a credit builder loan? You can apply for a credit builder loan at your bank or credit union. Some websites also offer them, but you should make sure they’re reputable first before giving them any of your personal information.

#4 Pay your bills on time every month 

When building your credit, it’s important to stay on top of your bills. If you don’t, it may end up hurting your credit score in the long run. Bill collectors may report late payments to credit bureaus. 

And this includes paying your student loans on time if you’re a recent grad. As a reminder, those payments will be due again starting May 1, 2022 according to the latest student loan update from the Biden administration.  

One or two months of missed payments might not have a huge effect on your credit score. But consistently paying bills late can quickly drop your scores and affect the interest rates you’re offered for future accounts. If you need help, consider using an app like Rocket Money (formerly Truebill) to help you manage your bills and track your spending. 

#5 Avoid opening too many accounts at once 

When establishing your credit, you’re likely to receive a lot of credit card offers from banks, your favorite stores, and other private lenders. Sometimes, those offers will seem like a good idea – especially if you can get one with perks or a low-interest rate. But don’t be fooled by the idea of “easy credit” like many students and recent grads! 

Having too many accounts open at once will make it more difficult to build your credit score. Why? Because each of these cards represents another account that could potentially go into debt. 

On top of that, each time you apply for a new credit account, it shows up on your credit report as an inquiry. Too many inquiries around the same time can have a negative impact on your score in the short term. 

#6 Keep unused accounts open 

At some point, you may have credit accounts with no balance that you aren’t actively using. And you may think it’s a good idea to close those accounts. But it’s not — at least not when it comes to building your credit.

Why? Because keeping those accounts open will help your credit history continue to grow. And, as we mentioned earlier, a long credit history positively contributes to your overall credit score. 

Just remember: there is a difference between keeping them open and actually using them. If you find yourself getting tempted by the bank offering new cards or increased credit limits, it might be better to just close the account. They can be costly if not managed correctly.

#7 Maintain a low credit utilization 

When you open your credit accounts you’ll have a combined maximum credit limit across all of your different accounts. But you want to make sure you’re only using what you need. This will help you maintain a low credit utilization, which, as you may remember, accounts for 30% of your credit score.

Keeping your credit utilization low helps to build credit because it shows lenders that you can responsibly manage your available credit. If there are accounts with high balances, try transferring some of the balance to lower interest rate cards. This will help you work on paying the principal balance down a lot quicker. 

Final Thoughts

A good credit score takes time and patience to achieve! But as we’ve shown in this post, some of the best and fastest ways to build credit include:

Get a credit card that doesn’t let you overspend, pay fees or accrue interest charges
Become an authorized user on a family member’s credit card 
Apply for a credit-builder loan 
Pay your bills on time every month 
Avoid opening too many accounts at once
Keep unused accounts open 
Maintain a low credit utilization 

As a beginner, it may take you two years to reach a “Very Good” or “Exceptional” credit score. But if you apply those lessons and continue to learn about financial literacy, you’ll be well on your way! 

And if you want more financial tips, check out the rest of our blog where we talk about topics like how to get started in investing, the best ways to make extra money, and how to win scholarships like the Fulbright Scholarship!

Products and services linked on our website may contain affiliate links. If you take specific actions after clicking these affiliate links, Scholly may earn a commission at no cost to you. Please refer to www.self.inc/pricing for the most recent pricing options.
*All Credit Builder Accounts made by Lead Bank, Member FDIC, Equal Housing Lender, Sunrise Banks, N.A. Member FDIC, Equal Housing Lender or SouthState Bank, N.A. Member FDIC, Equal Housing Lender. Subject to ID Verification. Individual borrowers must be a U.S. Citizen or permanent resident and at least 18 years old. Valid bank account and Social Security Number are required. All loans are subject to consumer report review and approval. All Certificates of Deposit (CD) are deposited in Lead Bank, Member FDIC, Sunrise Banks, N.A., Member FDIC or SouthState Bank, N.A., Member FDIC.
**The Self Visa® Credit Card is issued by Lead Bank, Member FDIC, Equal Housing Lender, or SouthState Bank, N.A., Member FDIC, Equal Housing Lender.
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
With a new school year here, now’s the perfect time to get serious about searching for and winning scholarships to pay for college!

Since many applications for scholarships require an essay, you’ll want to know how to write one that persuades the scholarship program board that you’re the right person to receive the money available! 

If done right, your scholarship essay is a window into your world. Similar to your personal statement for college applications, these essays should give the readers a sense of you as a dimensional person—beyond what your high school GPA and test scores alone can reflect.

At Scholly, we’ve collectively written and read TONS of scholarship essays. And, in this post, we’re sharing our favorite tips and strategies to help you write winning scholarship essays and drastically improve your chances of graduating debt free!

Here’s a quick overview of what we’ll cover: 

18 tips for writing a winning essay for scholarship applications 
10 things to leave out of your scholarship essays 
An outline to help you format your essay 
3 winning scholarship essay examples

Feel free to jump ahead to the section that interests you most or follow along as we begin with…

18 Tips for Writing a Winning Scholarship Essay
#1 Adhere to the principles of writing ANY strong essay

Like any other essay you write for school, you’ll want to format your scholarship essays in a way that makes it easy for the reader to consume and digest the content. In other words, a winning essay will have a good “flow.” 

Here are some effective essay writing skills that will help you develop an effective scholarship essay format:

Have a strong opening sentence to the essay, sometimes called a “hook.” This is a great overview of types of essay hooks, but remember, stay true to your own voice and tone (more on this later). 

For example, you may want to come out of the gates strong with a snapshot of where you see yourself in 10 years, after getting the education of your dreams: “Diving deep into the mysterious reaches of the ocean daily may not be everyone’s central goal in life, but I can’t wait to search for and protect endangered aquatic life for a living.”

Stick to the tried-and-true introduction, body, and conclusion structure. Even if the essay prompt seems relatively loose, you’ll want your essay to have a clear beginning, middle, and end.
Start new paragraphs for new ideas. It’s MUCH better to have more short paragraphs than whopping paragraphs that are hard to read! 
Make sure to wrap up your essay neatly and don’t just dead-end it. You can round it out, for example, with a declaration of why you wish to pursue post secondary education: “Ultimately, I want to be a strong role model for other young women who may have been afraid to use their voices.” You may not have time for a whole conclusion paragraph, but a quick “bow” on the end is nice.

And because sometimes the hardest part is starting when writing a scholarships essay or personal statement, here’s a video that will give you some ideas on how to write an intriguing first line:

#2 Familiarize yourself with the essay prompt… and stick to it!

Read the prompt several times and be totally clear about what it’s asking. Many scholarship programs have similar themes for the essay prompts, such as how you’ve demonstrated leadership qualities or how greater financial freedom will impact your life as a college student.

If the prompt doesn’t seem to have a question in it (e.g. “Reflect on the state of the environment and your role in helping it”) then we highly recommend that you re-frame the essay prompt as a question. So for example, ask yourself: “What is the overall state of the world’s natural environment and how am I directly impacting it?”

And it may sound obvious, but do NOT deviate from the prompt. Your ability to address a highly specific topic is part of what scholarship committees will assess. It can be easy for your thoughts to meander, but stick directly to the prompt.

#3 Choose a topic that you genuinely enjoy

You’ll want to stick to the essay prompt. But in some cases, you may have some freedom to choose the topic, or at least the central focus. Write about a subject, event, or value that means something to you. You’ll produce better work and come across more authentically if you care about what you’re writing. This goes a long way in improving your scholarship essays without creating more hard work for yourself.

Here’s what we mean. Let’s say a prompt asks you to describe a time that you were proud of yourself. Several instances may come to mind. Maybe it was when you dove off the high diving board the first time. Or maybe it was when you returned a wallet you found with $100 inside. 

Don’t choose which instance you think the scholarship essay readers want to hear. Choose the one that feels most resonant to you. It may sound cheesy, but when you write earnestly from the heart, your writing will be much stronger.

#4 Do a little research on the scholarship provider 

Who is the company or organization running the scholarship program? Read up a bit about them on their website’s home page. Get familiar with their mission and their motivation for giving this scholarship. When you’re better informed about the scholarship committee, you’re better able to tailor your essay to them.

Many scholarship providers also feature previous scholarship winners on their website, sometimes with the essay (or an excerpt from it) that won. Study what the scholarship provider says about those previous winners to get an idea of which of your qualities to highlight in your essay.  

#5 Know the word/character limit

Most scholarship essays have a word or character limit for your essay. If you’re not used to being mindful of these parameters, it can be hard to gauge what “250 words” actually looks like. As a rule of thumb, 250 words is equivalent to one typed page, double-spaced. (And therefore 500 words = 2 typed, double-spaced pages, and so on).

We suggest that you take an essay of yours (or any piece of written work, really) and run a word/character count on it so that you can get a feel for various lengths. Microsoft Word and Google Docs have functions for this, but you can also use a letter counter like this one. 

Once you know the word or character length, stick to it! If you have to write a 500 word essay, don’t write 501 words. You can be disqualified for going over. And while you don’t necessarily have to write an essay that hits the limit, it’s a good rule of thumb to come as close as possible.

#6 Brainstorm and plan

We can’t stress this one enough. The entire essay writing process will go much more smoothly if you have a road map for where you’re going. The very first step is to get some organic ideas circulating so that you end up choosing an essay focus that makes the most sense for you. Here are some awesome essay brainstorming techniques.

After you have a clear sense of your essay’s focus, you can begin to outline. Some students like to skip the outline. But an outline actually makes the drafting process much faster. That’s why we’ve shared an essay outline you can use later in this post! 

Depending on the length and depth of the essay, you can even just lay out the details you’ll want to include in your introduction, body, and conclusion. It can be as simple as that, but you don’t want to skip the planning process.

#7 Appeal to ethos, pathos, and logos

Uh, what-os? If you haven’t learned about ethos, pathos, and logos yet, let’s give you a quick primer. Ethos, pathos, and logos are modes of persuading your reader. In other words, they’re techniques to make your work more powerful and convincing.

Here is a great overview of ethos, pathos, and logos, but in short, here’s what each refers to:

Ethos = how you establish your own credibility, reliability, or authority on the subject matter (hint: you’ll be relying largely on your own life experiences in your scholarship essays).

For example, you might discuss how your experience working a part-time job has influenced your thoughts on minimum wage laws.

Pathos = how you use emotional appeal (including creativity, imagination, etc.) to tell your story or make your case.

For example, you might paint a picture of all of the wildlife lost in massive brush fires.

Logos = how you use logic or ration to convey your point.

For example, you may use statistics to convey how reliant high school students are on their cell phones.

Here’s a graphic that breaks down ethos, pathos, and logos clearly:

Basically, in the ideal essay, you’ll use all three types of support to make your essay as earnest and persuasive as possible.

#8 Be honest

Your life and experiences are interesting and important! You do not need to embellish or make up details to try to seem more deserving of the scholarship money. Nothing is more powerful than your authenticity. And trust us, it’s much easier for readers to spot baloney in an essay than you may think.

Here’s a simple example. If you’re a tutor, you may be inclined to say something a bit dramatic, like, “over the last 4 years, I’ve had the privilege of helping shape thousands of lives.” 

Hmmm…have you really tutored thousands of students? Likely not—you’re busy! We get it. It’s easy to embellish. 

Instead, you could say something to the effect of: “After 4 years of tutoring nearly 150 individuals in math and science, I feel my own math and material science skills have improved substantially.”

Trust us—your unexaggerated accomplishments are impressive!

#9 Show, don’t tell

This is the cardinal rule for creative writing. Try to paint a vivid picture for your reader instead of just explaining everything. For example, don’t just say that you’re stressed out by juggling work and high school. Illustrate what that stress looks like in your life. (Are you pulling all-nighters and pounding coffee? Doing homework on your breaks between work, school activities, and community service?) Create a picture, and provide specific, believable examples.

Here’s an example of something you might write if you’re asked to discuss a challenge you’ve faced:

Instead of saying “In middle school, I tore my ACL playing ice hockey,” you can be more vivid. 

Try something like: “It was like an anvil had smashed down on my knee. In searing pain, I laid on the ice as the crowd fell silent. Something was very wrong.”

Notice how we immediately FEEL the impact of the injury in the latter example!

Here’s a video from Reedsy that shares some more creative writing tips to help you do more showing than telling when you start writing your scholarships essays: 

#10 Be specific and concise 

While we encourage you to be evocative in your language, we also want to stress that you should get to the point. Typically, the simplest, most direct word choices are the most effective. Avoid generalizations in favor of specific examples. Likewise, avoid flowery language in favor of more succinct sentences.

Let’s demonstrate. The following sentiment feels overly general and wordy:

“I love nature because nature is beautiful. Honestly, I can’t think of a single thing I don’t like to do in nature. Really, it’s been my favorite place to be since a young age and any activity that involves being outside is just good for my soul.”

This rewrite expresses the same idea in a much more succinct way:

“Whether I’m hiking, wading in the ocean, or planting seasonal flowers in the garden, I am rejuvenated by being in nature.”

#11 Use exclamation points sparingly

We all know that exclamation marks indicate excitement! Right?! 

Truthfully, we love exclamation points! And while winning financial aid in the form of scholarships IS very exciting, too many exclamation marks can be overkill. 

So as a rule of thumb, don’t use more than a couple of exclamation marks throughout your scholarship essay. Also make sure they’re appropriate to the prompt. We’ve seen some pretty creative scholarship essay prompts in our day (like one that asks to share a funny story or joke). In this case, you can use exclamation marks more freely.

Many people falsely believe that an exclamation mark will make a sentence more powerful. But the truth is, empowering statements pack a punch without one.

For example, “I’m looking forward to becoming a lawyer as a means of creating a more just and egalitarian world” is a powerful statement. You don’t need to throw an exclamation point on the end to make it more resonant.

#12 Emphasize your resilience

Scholarship prompts often ask you about a hardship you’ve overcome. We love this type of question because it gives the reader a chance to understand a student’s resilience and ability to problem solve. These characteristics are huge on a scholarship essay.

The mistake many students make on this question is to write 100% about the hardships they’ve faced without acknowledging or discussing how they overcame them. Essay readers are not simply looking for the hardest story when selecting a winner, but rather a complete narrative that includes how the student has worked to overcome the challenge.

In addition, we recommend focusing on a central event or experience — which tends to read as more powerful, especially when faced with a word or character limit. You may have faced several hardships in your life, but your essay will be more focused if you choose one that you’ve overcome.

#13 Be professional… but also be yourself

While you’ll want to avoid swearing and overly colloquial or conversational language, you DO want to be yourself. That means writing in your own voice and tone. So long as you keep it professional, readers want you to sound like YOU. You don’t have to write a stuffy essay for it to be good! Keep it clean and clear, but also keep it real!

Here’s a great piece on the difference between voice and tone, and how you can improve your writing skills to stand out.

#14 Sell yourself… but also be humble

Is this the definition of a humble brag? Maybe. Your scholarship essay is a great place to share your accomplishments. But don’t just list all of your best qualities and accomplishments as a rationale for why you deserve the scholarship award. It’s important to strike a fine balance.

For example, the following sounds a bit like a brag “pile on:”

“As a straight-A student who is always the first to get the answers in my classes, the captain of my debate team, and a proud volunteer at the homeless shelter, I truly believe I deserve this scholarship.”

Instead, you can simply say something like, “The discipline I bring to my academics and volunteer work reflects how hard I intend to work in my college courses, and I would be grateful for the financial assistance to attend.”

#15 Be brief with your “thank you”

Your character, dedication, and integrity should come through naturally in your writing. You don’t need to add a long-winded “Thank you for reading this essay” paragraph at the end of your essay.

Most scholarship essays are fairly short, so avoid bloating your essay with gratitude and praise for the opportunity. Use your character and words allotments to answer the prompt thoroughly instead!

If you have space, a brief thank you is thoughtful and appropriate. But you’ll want to be as succinct as possible. For example, at the very end of your essay, you can simply say something like, “Thank you for this opportunity and for taking the time to read this essay.” Bam. Polite but to the point.

If you can’t fit your thanks in the essay due to the word count, you can also wait to write a thank you letter after you’ve received the scholarship. 

#16 Pause, proofread, and revise

The author Robert Graves said, “There’s no such thing as good writing, only good rewriting,” and it’s true; nothing comes out perfect the first time. So revise, revise, revise!

In the revision process, we’re HUGE fans of taking breaks. Walk away from your work to clear your mind and then come back to it. You’ll see your essay with fresh eyes which will help you take it to the next level.

If you feel comfortable doing so, it’s also a good idea to hand off your work to someone else for feedback. Choose a trusted teacher, peer, or friend, and be open to their suggestions for improvement.

#17 Give yourself enough time

Like any written assignment, you’ll want to give yourself enough time to think about the prompt, plan, draft, and revise. A well-planned essay has a much higher chance of winning than one you crank out last minute. 

We recommend giving yourself at least 2 weeks before the deadline of an essay to brainstorm, draft, and revise your essay. Ideally, you should leave a couple of days between each of these stages of the essay writing process. This break will help you avoid essay writing burnout. It’ll also give you a better chance to edit errors, typos, and places for improvement.

#18 Reuse your scholarships essays

Sometimes you don’t even need to write a new scholarship essay. If the essay prompts and directions are nearly identical between one scholarship application and another, you can reuse the essay. If you’re a high school senior, you might even be able to reuse the personal statement you write for college applications. And this will save you a ton of time! 

For example, let’s say one scholarship asks you to write an essay addressing a prompt that says something like “Why should you receive this scholarship?” and another gives you a prompt like “Why do you deserve this scholarship?”. Your answer to both prompts is probably going to be the same, right?

Write the essay for one application. Then, reuse and adapt that same essay to fit the word count, directions, etc. of the second application. 

Just make sure of one thing: if you mention the scholarship provider’s name (e.g. Coca Cola Foundation) in your essay, remember to change the name when reusing the essay for another scholarship application!

10 Things to Leave Out of Your Scholarship Essay

Now that you have a sense of how to attack your scholarship essay, let’s take a look at what to leave out of it. 

Keep in mind that these rules aren’t written in stone, of course, but they’re guidelines that will help you write the most unique and compelling scholarship essay possible.

Okay, so here’s what you’ll typically want to avoid… 

#1 Inspirational quotes

Who doesn’t love an inspirational quote?! We sure do. Whether you find them scrolling Instagram or keep them tacked up above your desk, a great quote can be super empowering. But when it comes to scholarship essays, it’s better to leave them out.

DON’T drop in famous quotes, many of which are overused. For example: “Mahatma Gandhi said to ‘be the change you wish to see in the world’ which is why I’m applying for this scholarship award. I want to attend college so I can become a nurse and change the world.” 

Here’s the thing: wanting to be a nurse is incredibly admirable in its own right! It doesn’t have to be attached to anyone else’s sweeping statements about life or humanity. This essay is about you, so famous quotes are just a distraction.

DO include meaningful advice or wisdom you’ve received directly from the important people in your life. This is much more personal and will provide a unique account of who you are and what you’re all about. 

For example: “My mother, a registered nurse for 20 years, has always encouraged me to help care for others as a means of making the world a better place. This is why I’m planning to follow in her footsteps and go to nursing school.”

#2 Overly general phrases and platitudes

The name of the game for winning scholarships is standing out from the mix. This means you don’t want to say the exact same thing as hundreds of other applicants. 

Platitudes are common, overly simplified statements that people use all the time. For example, “Good things come to those who wait.” These are okay phrases to say, but refrain from using them in your scholarship essays to avoid sounding like every other high school student. 

DON’T discuss the scholarship opportunity in platitudes like, “It would mean the world to me to win this money” or “Winning this scholarship would be life-changing.” These statements may be true, but they don’t really tell us much about you.

DO illustrate specifically how things will change if you win the scholarship money. For example, “This scholarship award would enable me to have only one part-time job instead of two, providing me more time to focus on my college courses.”

#3 Cliche stories or themes

Many scholarship essay prompts ask you to discuss how winning a scholarship would impact you. And this is often where cliches creep in.

Cliches are phrases, stories, or themes that are overused to the point that they lose their power and meaning. And they’ll definitely weaken your scholarship essay.

The most common example of a cliche theme in scholarship essays is the “Cinderella” or “underdog” storyline (think: Cinderella getting her glass slipper, only the scholarship is the glass slipper). Many cliches involve a person who, with a little help, turns it all around and prevails.

In real life, we LOVE a Cinderella story as much as anyone. But you can imagine why this type of story ends up in scholarship essays a lot!

DON’T simply share a story about yourself that paints you as a down-on-your-luck student who could have it all if ONLY you won this scholarship money. Here’s what this might look like: “I’ve never really won anything in life: no contests, giveaways, or competitions. But if I win this scholarship and save money on college, I’ll be able to focus 100% on my academic performance and become the youngest Supreme Court Justice in American history.”

Don’t get us wrong, we’re all about dreaming BIG! But when it comes to scholarship essays, we want to help you to avoid falling into cliche narratives that dampen the power of your story and hurt your chances of winning. 

DO be realistic and specific when talking about yourself, your background, your career goals, your leadership qualities, and your aspirations. Focus on one primary goal that you’ll be better able to attain if you win the scholarship money. For example: “As a Spanish double major, I would love the opportunity to study abroad as an international student in Madrid to immerse myself in the culture and become fluent in Spanish. Winning this scholarship money would help fund my semester overseas.”

#4 Profanity 

Here’s another one that probably seems WAY obvious. You’d never swear in a scholarship essay, right? But you may be surprised at how many people do! 

DON’T use any profanity or curse words, even if they’re part of common phrases that we hear all the time on TV and in the real world. 

For example, try not to say things like: “I’ve worked my ass off for 18 years and now I am ready to apply myself even further in this rigorous pre-med program.”

Will you actually offend anyone with that kind of conversational tone? Probably not. But it’s better to be safe than sorry. Plus, we know you can be more creative than that!

DO stress your excitement, perseverance, and preparedness for this next chapter without the curse words. You can always use a thesaurus to look up new and exciting ways to say things or use imagery to paint a picture of your experiences.

For example: “Being a college student has been a marathon and at times I’ve worried I may not cross the finish line. But now that I’ve graduated, I know what I’m capable of and I’m thrilled to be starting this graduate program.”

#5 “Text speak”

We realize that texting is the way of the world. And we’re all pretty accustomed to abbreviating words and using acronyms daily (smdh and lol-ing about how common this language is now). But keep your “text speak” in your group chats and out of your scholarship essays. 

Your scholarship essay is a great place to showcase your eloquence and professionalism, so (unless directed otherwise), write as you would for a teacher or a boss. 

DON’T use statements like, “College should be free for everyone IMO, but because it’s not, I need this scholarship 2 help fund my education.” It looks hilarious taken out of context, right? This kind of thing is super common and distracting for the reader. 

DO remove any and all “text speak” in favor of your own unique voice and tone. You can still use mild humor and even talk like you, but keep it academic and professional.

#6 Controversial topics 

Unless the essay prompt explicitly asks you to address a currently trending, controversial topic and take a stance on it, don’t. These essays are about you. 

Based on the prompt and your personal experiences, perhaps you’ll discuss a “hot topic,” but don’t do so just to make your essay stand out. You’ll risk alienating your reader(s).

We definitely encourage you to be yourself, and to be open and honest about your life experiences, but “hot takes” are better left for Twitter than used in scholarship essays.

DON’T treat your scholarship essay like a platform to tackle a trending topic. A thoughtful essay reads 100 times better than your stance on a popular topic of the moment.

DO take firm stances on causes that you believe in and articulate how winning this scholarship will help you advocate for them. For example, you can certainly discuss your commitment to advocating for gender equality or against wage inequality. 

To be clear: we’re NOT suggesting that you sanitize your beliefs or your writing, or dampen your beliefs to cater to specific readers. The key is to be mindful of the prompt and to avoid unnecessary detours or tangents that tread into hot take territory unrelated to the prompt. 

#7 Emojis, photos, and funky fonts

We love emojis too, but they shouldn’t make their way into your scholarship essay (and, yes, we’ve seen it happen plenty of times). Unless for any reason you’re asked to creatively use an emoji in your response, just resist the urge.

The same goes for photos, fun fonts, or anything that isn’t straightforward typeface. Unless, again, you’re given the green light.

DON’T turn your scholarship essay into an art project. It may seem like a good idea, but keep it professional. More importantly, you want your essay to be as easy to read as possible, without overwhelming the readers.

DO stick to the standard: Times New Roman font, size 12 if you’re attaching your essay as a Google or Word document. If you’re pasting your essay into the text box on a website, this will format your content automatically.

And of course, read the directions carefully so you know how to format your scholarship essay when it comes to things like single vs double spacing, margins, headers/footers, etc.

#8 Extreme declarations

It’s almost always a good idea to avoid extreme, either-or perspectives. And this is definitely true when it comes to scholarship essays. An extreme declaration involves only seeing one side of a situation (often the negative side) and presenting it as fact. 

DON’T make fatalistic declarations about the future and take unnecessarily strong stances on topics. 

For example: “If I don’t get this scholarship, I won’t have enough financial aid to attend college and I’ll never get a good job to support myself.” 

Or, “The education system in the United States is entirely broken and there’s no way to turn it around.”

See how both of these statements can give the reader a feeling that the writer is not seeing the full picture? 

DO replace extreme declarations with hopeful and open-minded approaches to the future. This is not to say that you can’t take a firm and realistic stance on a topic. But try to reflect a generally optimistic and proactive mindset.

For example, if the prompt asks you about an issue facing the world today, you may say something like: “While there has undeniably been immense damage done to the planet, I’m excited to pursue a double major in environmental science and computer science as a means of taking action to reverse these toxic effects of climate change.”

Much more dynamic and compelling, right?

#9 Put-downs of other applicants

Speaking ill of anyone or saying why other students are less deserving of scholarship money isn’t a good look. You can absolutely articulate why you’re deserving without putting anyone else down!

DON’T speak unkindly about anyone, especially hypothetical applicants who you see yourself as more deserving than. This may be well-intentioned, but it’s sure to come across as distasteful no matter how well it’s written. 

DO “stay in your own lane,” as they say, and don’t let the essay wander to focus on and nitpick others. Feel free to provide compelling reasons for why you’re a great candidate to receive scholarship money without bringing others into it!

#10 Your autobiography

As discussed, most scholarships require a pretty tight word or character limits, so you won’t have a lot of room to tell your whole life story. When talking about yourself, it can be easy to get on a roll and include more details than necessary. But try to stay focused.

DON’T write a complete autobiography of your life. It can be easy to believe that going beyond the word limit will come across as working harder or putting in more of an effort. In reality, scholarship committees actually put a lot of weight into your ability to follow directions. So while your autobiography may be incredible, it’s unlikely you’ll  do it justice in 500 words or less (or whatever the requirement is).  

DO choose and focus on a central incident, challenge, personality trait, hobby, or aspiration.  For example, discuss only your love of animals, your passion for community service, your memory of the day your younger sister was born, etc.

Scholarship Essay Outline Example

We know there’s a lot of information packed in the tips we just shared. And it’d probably be a challenge to remember everything when you start writing. So, here’s an outline you can use to easily format your scholarship essays!

Hook Introduction: Open the essay with an intriguing excerpt of the story you’ll share to address the writing prompt.
1-3 Body Paragraphs: Continue to share relevant details of the story, explaining how it relates to the prompt and makes you a good candidate for the specific scholarship. Be sure to highlight things scholarship committees are looking for, like leadership skills in school activities, your academic and career goals, why you’re specifically applying for this scholarship, etc.
Conclusion: Wrap up your essay by restating your interest in the scholarship and showing how the story you’ve shared demonstrates your readiness for college.
Winning Scholarship Essay Examples 

So far, we’ve shared a lot of tips and strategies to help you write the best scholarship essay possible. But what does all that look like in practice? 

Here are 3 videos with scholarship essay examples from now college students who knew to apply many, if not all, of the tips we’ve shared in this blog post!

Example #1

This student’s scholarship essay helped him win over $100,000 in scholarships to attend the University of Maryland, College Park! 

Example #2

This student’s scholarship essay helped her win a full-tuition scholarship to attend Vanderbilt University! 

Example #3

This student’s scholarship essay helped her win $60,000 in scholarships to attend an Ivy League university!

Want More Scholarship Opportunities?

There are tons of scholarships that you can apply for and win. So, don’t just focus on the scholarship program you’re currently writing an essay for. Apply for as many scholarships as you can!

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics, like how to find jobs with tuition reimbursement programs, understand and apply for FAFSA, and win scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
There’s no hiding the truth. Going to college in America can be incredibly expensive.

We created Scholly to address this very problem, and we’re proud of the more than $100 million dollars in scholarships students have won over the years. But we know scholarships are just one of the ways students pay for college, and that for many students, loans are essential for making the college dream a reality.

Since you’re here, we’re gonna guess you’re thinking about taking out one or more student loans to help cover the costs. Right?

Okay. Now, we’re gonna take one more guess. You don’t want to end up like the 69% of millennials who recently reported feeling moderately to extremely regretful over taking out student loans, right? 

You surely said yes to that one. Didn’t you? At least, we hope you did! If so, we made this guide just for you! 

By the end of reading this guide, you’ll have learned everything you need to know to make an informed decision on student loans. To get you there, we’ll cover these questions: 

What are student loans? 
What’s the difference between federal and private student loans?
What is the maximum amount of student loans you can get? 
How do student loan interest rates work? 
When do you have to pay back student loans?

Feel free to click on the question that interests you most to skip ahead to that section of the guide! 

Or, you can follow along as we start with general questions you may have about student loans and then gradually work our way down to the stuff that tends to cause the most confusion.

Ready? Let’s go! 

What are student loans?

At the most basic level, student loans are a form of financial aid.

You can use student loans to help pay for things like tuition, accommodation in a student dorm, health insurance, books, and whatever else is included in your school’s cost of attendance. 

But you wouldn’t be alone if you think of student loans as the type of financial aid you’re going to like the least… Why’s that?  

Well, because unlike other forms of financial aid, like scholarships and grants, you’re gonna have to pay these ones back. And, on top of that, you’ll also have to pay interest and fees as well as navigate a bunch of other terms.

Luckily, not all student loans are bad. 

You just have to make sure you have a strategic game plan for finding a good student loan – especially when it comes to private loans. We’re going to cover that later in this guide. But before we can get to that, it’s important you know the answers to these next few questions. 

Federal vs. private student loans. What’s the difference?   

You’ll have two major options when it comes to getting student loans:

Federal student loans (i.e. money you borrow from the government)
Private student loans (i.e. money you borrow from a private lender, like a bank, credit union, or private financial organization)

But there’s more to it than that. So, let’s go into a bit more detail into how those two options differ.

Federal Student Loans: The Basic Info 

Since taking out a federal student loan means borrowing money from the government, it only makes sense that it’s also the government who decides on the terms and conditions of the loan. Generally, this makes federal student loans the best options for students.

For example, with federal loans, interest rates are fixed and relatively low. The loans are available to you if you need them, regardless of your credit score (except for PLUS loans). And, you don’t need to worry about paying the loans back until after you’re done with school. 

There are 3 types of federal student loans.

Direct Subsidized Stafford Loans 
Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans 
Direct PLUS Loans 
Federal Student Loan Eligibility
Type of Loan 	Basic Eligibility Requirements 
Direct Subsidized Stafford Loans	Undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need 
Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans	Undergraduate, graduate and professional students regardless of financial need 
Direct PLUS Loans	Graduate and professional students; Parents of dependent undergraduate students 

Source

So, if there are 3 types, why not just take out federal student loans? 

Well, for one thing, as you might have noticed, you may not meet the eligibility requirements for all types of federal student loans. And, for another, there’s a limit to how much money you can borrow.

We’ll go into more detail on those two limitations of federal student loans in a bit. But let’s first take a look at your other option for getting a student loan. 

Private Student Loans: The Basic Info 

Private student loans are a bit trickier to understand. That’s because the terms and conditions of private student loans depend on who you choose as your private lender. And there are many to choose from! 

But, generally, compared to federal student loans, interest rates on private student loans tend to be a bit higher. How much you can borrow does depend on your credit score or the credit score of your co-signer. And, in some cases, you may have to make payments while you’re still in school. 

Does that mean you should avoid private student loans at all costs? Not exactly. Why? Because not all private student loans are bad and can still be great options when you need more support in covering the costs of school. 




What is the maximum amount of student loans you can get? 

Alright, now that you know the difference between federal vs. private student loans, let’s look at how much money you can borrow for each. 

Federal Student Loans: Borrowing Limits 

As we just briefly mentioned, there’s a limit to how much money you can borrow with federal student loans. But what exactly determines the limit? 

The limit to how much you can borrow for federal student loans depends on the information you input while filling out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA®).

(If you haven’t already done that, check out our guide on How to Apply for FAFSA!)

Your school’s financial aid department will use your FAFSA to determine the amount and type of loans to offer you based on: 

Your demonstrated financial need
Whether you’re an undergraduate or graduate student
What year you are in school 
Your “dependency status” (i.e. whether you need to include information about your parents on your FAFSA)

Take a look at this table from the Federal Student Aid Department to get a general idea of how much you can borrow with direct subsidized and unsubsidized federal student loans: 

 

Year	Dependent Students (except students whose parents are unable to obtain PLUS Loans)	Independent Students (and dependent undergraduate students whose parents are unable to obtain PLUS Loans)
First-Year Undergraduate Annual Loan Limit	$5,500—No more than $3,500 of this amount may be in subsidized loans.	$9,500—No more than $3,500 of this amount may be in subsidized loans.
Second-Year Undergraduate Annual Loan Limit	$6,500—No more than $4,500 of this amount may be in subsidized loans.	$10,500—No more than $4,500 of this amount may be in subsidized loans.
Third Year and Beyond Undergraduate Annual Loan Limit	$7,500—No more than $5,500 of this amount may be in subsidized loans.	$12,500—No more than $5,500 of this amount may be in subsidized loans.
Graduate or Professional Student Annual Loan Limit	Not Applicable (all graduate and professional students are considered independent)	$20,500 (unsubsidized only)

Source

Notice the table didn’t really include any information on PLUS loans. That’s because PLUS loans are a little different from subsidized and unsubsidized loans in that they are only available to graduate students and parents who want to help their child pay for school.

If that’s you, with a Grad PLUS or Parent Plus, you can take out as much money as you need to cover the total cost of attendance minus the amount of other forms of financial aid (e.g. grants, work study, scholarships, etc.).  

But if you’re an undergraduate that still needs to borrow more than what you can get from federal student loans, then that’s when you may want to consider getting a private student loan. 

Private Student Loans: Borrowing Limits 

Unlike federal student loans, each private lender gets to set their own limits on how much money you can borrow.

Generally, the amount will depend on things like how confident the private lender is in your ability to pay them back, how much you’ve received in other forms of financial aid, and the total cost of attendance for your school. 

Before deciding how much money you can borrow, private lenders will want to know information like: 

Your credit score
Your employment history 
The credit score and employment history of a co-signer (e.g. a parent or trusted adult) 
The type of degree you plan to get 
The total cost of attendance 

To give you an idea of some private student loan limits, take a look at this table created by NerdWallet: 



Now that you have an understanding of how much you may be able to borrow, let’s move on to the most confusing topic when it comes to student loans. Yep, it’s time to discuss interest rates! 

How do student loan interest rates work? 

Interest rates are arguably the scariest part about federal and private student loans. 

And here’s why: interest rates are what can make a small, reasonable loan turn into a scary, overwhelming headache of debt. At least if you don’t understand how they work.

So, if you’ve been skimming, now is a good time to slow down your pace. Because this part is important. Ready? 

What is an interest rate? 

Bankrate defines interest rates as: 

 “the proportion of an amount loaned which a lender charges as interest to the borrower, normally expressed as an annual percentage. It is the rate a bank or other lender charges to borrow its money.”

If you’re rereading that for the third time and still feel confused, don’t worry! We got you. Let’s look at some examples based on federal and private student loans. 

Federal Student Loans: Interest Rates 

Let’s imagine you’re an undergraduate whose FAFSA results have determined you will need financial assistance to pay for college. You’re looking to take out a federal subsidized student loan with a principal amount of $3000 for the 2021/22 academic year. 

Since it’s a federal student loan, we know three things: 

The interest rate is fixed, meaning the interest rate will remain the same throughout the duration of the loan.
The loan will follow a simple daily interest formula, meaning the interest is calculated daily.
With this year’s interest rates on federal student loans, your interest rate will be 3.73%.

2021/22 Federal Student Loan Interest Rates 

Type of Loan	Interest Rate
Undergraduate Direct Loans (Subsidized and Unsubsidized)	3.73%
Graduate Direct Loans (Unsubsidized)	5.28%
Graduate and Parent PLUS Loans	6.28%

Alright, now let’s take a look at how you would calculate the interest on that $3000 subsidized student loan. 

Calculate the Daily Interest: First, divide the interest rate by 365 to get the daily interest rate. (.0373 ÷ 365 = .00010219) 
Determine the Interest Per Day: Next, multiply that daily interest rate by your principal amount. (.00010219 x 3000 = .30657) This means you’ll be charged about $0.306 in interest per day on the loan. 
Calculate the Interest Per Month: Then you’ll want to multiply the daily interest amount ($0.306) by the number of days in a month. (0.306 x 30 = 9.18). This means you’ll pay around $9.18 per month in interest.
Calculate the Yearly Interest: Finally, to get the amount of interest accrued per year, simply multiply that monthly amount by 12. ($9.18 x 12 = 110.16) So, you’ll pay about $110.16 per year in interest.

Luckily, that amount per year continues to go down as you pay off the principal balance.  

Also, since in our example, you got a subsidized federal loan, you don’t need to worry about the interest accruing while you’re in school at least half-time, for 6 months after you graduate, or during a deferment period. 

But that’s not the case for the other types of federal loans. For example, interest will accrue on unsubsidized federal loans while you’re still in school.

Private Student Loans: Interest Rates 

Interest rates on private student loans can get a bit more complex. That’s because, unlike federal loans, private lenders let you choose between a variable APR or fixed APR. 

With a variable APR, the interest rate can go up or down throughout the term of the loan. And with a fixed APR, the interest rate is fixed throughout the term of the loan.

In general, it’s safer to go with a fixed APR. But, in some cases, you may consider a variable APR due to the rates generally being lower at the start of the loan.

With some private student loans, you may also need to pay compound interest. If you’re not  sure what that means either, no problem. Let’s see a definition and then go through another example. 

According to Investopedia, having a compound interest rate means: 

“the daily interest isn’t being multiplied by the principal amount at the beginning of the billing cycle—it’s being multiplied by the outstanding principal plus any unpaid interest that’s accrued.”

In layman’s terms, that means that you’re paying interest on not only the principal loan amount, but also on the interest that accrues on the loan everyday.

To give you an even better idea of what that means, in this next example, let’s say you’re an undergraduate student looking to take out a private student loan of $17,000 for the upcoming academic year. 

After looking around at a couple of different private lenders, you decide to get a private student loan whose current interest rates range from 1.49%-10.49% (variable APR) and 3.49%-14.39% (fixed APR). You decide to go with a fixed APR, and the lender offers you a daily compound interest rate of 8.5%.

Now, let’s look at how to calculate your compound interest. 

Calculate the Daily Interest Rate: Find the daily interest rate by dividing your APR (8.5%) by 365. (.085 ÷ 365 = .00023288)
Calculate the Daily Interest: Next, we multiply your daily interest rate by your principal balance. (.00023288 x 17,000 = 3.958). So, your daily interest is $3.958.
Here’s where it differs from fixed interest. The next day, you’re not multiplying your daily interest rate by your principal balance anymore. You’re multiplying it by the new sum of your principal and yesterday’s daily interest (17,000 + 3.958 = 17,003.958). 

And then day by day, year by year, it continues to grow exponentially. 

Day 2: (.00023288 x 17,003.958 = 3.959) → new loan balance: $17,003.958 + $3.959 = $17,007.917
Day 3: (.00023288 x 17,007.917 = 3.96) → new loan balance: $17,007.917 + $3.96 = $17,011.87
Day 4: (.00023288 x 17,011.87 = 3.961) → new loan balance: $17,011.87 +  $3.961 = $17,015.831 


Now just imagine the new balance on day 365 or day 1825 (5 years)! 

A bit scary, but remember if you do your research, you can get better rates and terms than the loan we used in this example. We’ll show you how soon, but first let’s look at when you have to pay back your student loans. 

When do you have to pay back student loans? 

A conversation about paying back student loans is one that many people would choose to avoid. 

But, if you’d rather avoid all of that student loan regret we were talking about earlier, it’s a good idea that we do have this conversation right now. We promise it won’t be so bad  

Federal Loans: Paying Them Back 

For federal student loans, you should expect to see your first bill about 6 months after you graduate, drop below half-time enrollment, or leave school. 

But how much you have to pay will depend entirely on your student loan repayment plan, of which you have 8 different options:

Standard Repayment Plan
Graduated Repayment Plan
Extended Repayment Plan
Revised Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (REPAYE)
Pay As You Earn Repayment Plan (PAYE)
Income-Based Repayment Plan (IBR)
Income-Contingent Repayment Plan (ICR)
Income-Sensitive Repayment Plan (ISR)

As we’re sure you can imagine, each of those plans has its own eligibility requirements that would take quite a bit of time for us to sift through individually. But we don’t want to overwhelm you with all of that information just yet. So, here’s the gist. 

Depending on the type of federal loan and your chosen repayment plan, you’ll be paying anywhere from 10% of your discretionary income per month to high monthly payments that make sure you pay off the loan within ten years. 

To pay off your student loans faster, you can also make payments while you’re still in school and pay more than the minimum amount of your monthly repayment plan. 

In fact, both of these are good ideas and apply to private loans as well. 

Private Student Loans: Paying Them Back 

As you’ve probably come to expect by now, paying back private student loans isn’t as easy to generalize as federal student loans.

That’s because when you begin paying back the loan and the options for repayment are determined by the private lender. 

For some, you will need to make monthly payments immediately. For others, you’ll have a similar 6-month deferment plan as you’d have with federal student loans. And for others, you’ll need to make monthly payments while in school to cover all or part of the interest. 

It can definitely be confusing and costly if you don’t know what you’re getting yourself into. 

Which is definitely another reason why you’ll want to compare private student loans and make sure to find the best one for you before you sign any loan agreements.

Student Loan Alternatives 

If you’re still not too into the idea of getting student loans, we understand. Taking on debt is never a decision that should be made lightly. So, here are some student loan alternatives to consider: 

Appeal your financial aid package. If you feel your college’s financial aid department isn’t offering enough support in the form of grants, scholarships, and work-study, you can consider appealing your financial aid decision. But this typically only works if you and/or your family’s financial situation has changed since you last submitted the FAFSA.

Borrow the money from someone you know. Depending on how much you need, you may be able to borrow the money from a relative or family friend. The benefit of this option is that you can probably avoid paying interest. But this option also requires a lot of trust and, therefore, may not be the best route if you’re not sure when or how you’ll pay that relative or family friend back. 

Apply for scholarships. Of course, we know that those first two alternatives are not possible for everyone. But everyone can apply for scholarships. And there are tons of scholarships that go unclaimed every year. Why? Because — imagine this — not enough students know to apply for them! 

To find all of those scholarships, download Scholly Search. It’s the #1 scholarship app that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits!

Final Thoughts

Taking out student loans to help pay for school is definitely a big decision. But it doesn’t have to be a scary one that you regret later on! 

By planning ahead and understanding exactly how student loans work, you’ll be able to make a more informed decision and know how to find the best student loans for you. 

And, if you’re looking for more information on how to pay for college, check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on topics like how to graduate college debt free, find jobs that offer tuition reimbursement, and win popular scholarships like the Coca-Cola Scholarship!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
The 2021-2022 FAFSA is available for you to start filling out as soon as October 1, 2021. And you’ll want to get on that ASAP! Filling out the FAFSA early is one of the best ways to secure as much financial aid as you can to help pay for college. 

In this guide, we’ll be showing you how to put together a fool-proof application as well as answering common questions, like: 

When is the FAFSA deadline? 
Who is eligible for FAFSA? 
What documents do you need for the FAFSA? 
Can you get financial aid if your parents make a lot of money? 
Can financial aid cover full tuition? 

By applying what you learn here, you’ll be on your way to receiving the best financial aid package! To begin, let’s start with a quick overview of what FAFSA is and who’s eligible to apply.

So, What is FAFSA?

If you’re preparing to go to college—whether for the first time or as a returning student—chances are that you’ve heard the term “FAFSA” kicked around. Many students have heard of FAFSA but have questions about it.

FAFSA stands for “Free Application for Federal Student Aid” and is an application to receive money to pay for college from the United States Government, specifically from the U.S. Department of Education. 

The Very Short Version of the FAFSA Process

We’ll get into the nitty gritty details of exactly how to file a FAFSA shortly, but basically, you’ll fill out an application including information about your and your parents’ financial situation. Then, you’ll receive an EFC from the Department of Education.

EFC stands for “Expected Family Contribution,” in other words, what your family can afford to pay in college tuition for the upcoming school year. The lower your EFC, the more aid you’re eligible for.

And just a word to the wise: you’ll have to re-apply each year for the following school year. This means that you won’t necessarily be awarded the same amount every year of your college education. Because the amount of income you and your family earn every year can change, so can your financial aid package. 

Types of Federal Financial Aid

There are basically three types of federal student aid that are awarded through filling out the FAFSA: grants, loans, and work-study funds.

Grants are allotments of money that you do not have to pay back, and they’re typically based on financial need.
Loans are sums of money that are loaned to you by the government and that will need to be paid back, with interest, over a period of time.
Work-study programs provide part-time jobs for undergraduate and graduate students to help them earn money while in college.
FAFSA Eligibility

The basic eligibility requirements for federal student aid state that you must:

Demonstrate financial need (for most programs);
Be a U.S. citizen or an eligible noncitizen;
Have a valid Social Security number (with the exception of students from the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, or the Republic of Palau);
Be enrolled or accepted for enrollment as a regular student in an eligible degree or certificate program;
Be enrolled at least half-time to be eligible for Direct Loan Program funds;
Maintain satisfactory academic progress in college or career school;
Sign the certification statement on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid(FAFSA®) form stating that
you are not in default on a federal student loan,
you do not owe money on a federal student grant, and
you will use federal student aid only for educational purposes; and
Show you’re qualified to obtain a college or career school education by
having a high school diploma or a recognized equivalent such as a General Educational Development (GED) certificate;
completing a high school education in a homeschool setting approved under state law (or—if state law does not require a homeschooled student to obtain a completion credential—completing a high school education in a homeschool setting that qualifies as an exemption from compulsory attendance requirements under state law); or enrolling in an eligible career pathway program and meeting one of the “ability-to-benefit” alternatives
When is FAFSA Due? 

Your FAFSA must be filed by 11:59pm (Central) on June 30, 2022 (for the 2022-2023 school year). 

Now, remember the application opens on October 1, 2021. So, yes, this is a long window of time. But don’t wait until the FAFSA deadline!

To maximize your chances of securing enough financial aid, you’ll want to apply as soon as possible. A lot of federal aid is “first come, first served.”

Your FAFSA is also used to calculate how much money you’re eligible for from your state of residence. And each state has its own deadline. So, be sure to look up your state’s FAFSA deadline.

Additionally, every college you’re applying to has its own financial aid deadline, so you’ll want to check with each one individually.

How to Fill Out the FAFSA: Step-by-Step 
Step 1 – Determine Your Dependency Status

Determining whether or not you are a dependent or independent applicant is actually something you’ll do during the process of answering the FAFSA questions. So, if you don’t know off the top of your head, that’s okay! 

But the reason we suggest doing this first is so that you’ll be better able to gather the necessary information beforehand (for example, your parents’ tax information), making the process much easier!

Here’s the only difference between a dependent student and an independent student as it relates to the FAFSA: if you’re a dependent student, you’ll need to provide your parents’ financial information. If you’re an independent student, you won’t. 

So, are you an independent or dependent applicant? This is a great overview from the Federal Government on dependency status, but here’s the gist of what you need to know:

According to the Federal Government, an independent student is at least one of the following: “24 years old, married, a graduate or professional student, a veteran, a member of the armed forces, an orphan, a ward of the court, someone with legal dependents other than a spouse, an emancipated minor or someone who is homeless or at risk of becoming homeless.”

If you are none of the above, then you are a dependent applicant.

Keep in mind that if you are technically a dependent student but your parents are unwilling to complete a FAFSA, you unfortunately cannot be considered an independent student. In some rare instances, you may be eligible for a dependency override, such as in the case of abuse, neglect, or incarceration. 

Lastly, even if you are a dependent, note that you must claim any income you gained as well, including income from contests, gifts, etc.

Step 2 – Create an FSA ID

In order to complete the FAFSA, you’ll have to create an FSA ID, which allows you to access the application online and provide your electronic signature. 

Your FSA is uniquely yours. By law, you can’t create an FSA for someone else or have someone create one for you. This ID is entirely confidential.

If you are a dependent, which requires your parents’ financial information, then your parent(s) will need their own FSA ID.

Some of the most common FAFSA errors occur when students and parents mix up their FSA IDs!

Step 3 – Gather All Necessary Personal Information

Answering the FAFSA questions will be much more of a breeze if you gathered all of your personal information, and your parents’ personal information, before you start.

As far as tax information, you and/or your parents can use this super handy IRS retrieval tool to locate your tax information.

(Note that you’ll see that you need some documents from 2019. This is because FAFSA now takes financial information from the year before last year. So all financial information you gather will be for 2019).

If you’re a dependent student and a U.S citizen you’ll need your:

Social Security card
Driver’s license (if you have one)
W-2 forms (2019)
Federal income tax return (2019)
Untaxed income records (2019)
Current bank statements
Parents’ federal income tax return
Parents’ 2019 W-2 forms
Parents’ bank statements
Parents’ untaxed income records
Parents’ current business and investment records

If you’re a dependent student and not a U.S citizen:

You will submit all of the above, except a Social Security card. 

If you’re an independent student and a U.S citizen you’ll need your:

Social Security card
Driver’s license (if you have one)
W-2 forms (2019)
Federal income tax return (2019)
Untaxed income records (2019)
Your current bank statements

If you’re an independent student and not a U.S citizen:

You will submit all of the above, except a Social Security card
Step 4 – Determine What Parental Information You’ll Need

The above list of necessary FAFSA information is a guideline, but as we all know, everyone’s family situation is different. If you’re a dependent student, the information you need to include will vary depending on your parental dynamics. 

For example, what if your parents are divorced? Do you need to provide information for both parents?

Here’s a great infographic from the office of Federal Student Aid illustrating which parents’ information you’ll need for FAFSA based on your unique circumstances:

And here’s a quick breakdown of the infographic:

If your legal parents are unmarried, separated, or divorced, and do not live together… 

Provide the above-listed information for the parent you have resided with most during the last 12 months. If you have not lived with one parent more than another, provide information for the parent who has provided more financial support over the last 12 months. 

Note: if the parent you do not live with most paid alimony during 2018, this must be entered as income on your FAFSA.

If your legal parents are unmarried and currently living together…

Provide information for both of your parents. 

If your parents are married… 

Provide information for both of your parents. 

If your parent is remarried after being widowed or divorced… 

Provide information for your parent and step-parent.

If your parent is widowed… 

Provide your living parent’s information.

Finally, it’s worth noting that a legal parent, for the sake of FAFSA, refers to:

Your legal biological or adoptive parent 
A legal guardian that has been determined by the state and is reflected on your birth certificate

Unfortunately, at this time, foster parents, grandparents, older siblings, widowed step-parents, or aunts/uncles are not considered parents unless they have legally adopted you.

Step 5 – Decide Which Schools Will Receive Your FAFSA

You will need to submit a FAFSA for every school to which you are applying. One of the last questions on the FAFSA asks you to enter 6-digit codes for each college you’re applying to. You can find lists of 6-digit codes at www.fafsa.gov or by calling 1-800-433-3243. If for some reason you can’t find a particular school’s code, you may enter the address and contact information for the school manually.

Step 6 – Answer All of the FAFSA Questions

Once you’ve assembled all of the necessary information (really the hardest part), you’ll enter this information by answering a series of questions on the FAFSA application form. 

There are 100+ questions broken down into several categories:

Student’s personal information 
Student’s financial information 
Student’s status (which helps you determine if you need to enter parent information, if you haven’t figured that out beforehand)
Parents’ information 
Student’s household information
Student’s signature, date, and send off 

If you have all of the necessary information handy, answering the FAFSA questions shouldn’t be too hard. If you’re confused about what any of the questions are asking, however, we love this overview of FAFSA questions that offers clarification for each question, as well as who to contact directly for more help.

 Step 7 – Receive Your SAR and EFC

After you file your FAFSA you will receive your SAR report, which stands for “Student Aid Report.” Your SAR will come in the mail within 10 days or by email within 5 days if you provided an email address.

Your SAR will reflect all of the information you provided as well as your EFC (your “expected family contribution,” as discussed prior). 

You’ll also be notified if you have any missing information (in which case you will not receive an EFC) and provided directions for changing any information as needed.

Here’s everything you need to know about your SAR, but note that it will include:

A DRN, or “Data Release Number” which can be used later if you want to grant your college permission to change any information on your FAFSA
(Possibly) a note that you have been selected for verification. If you receive one, don’t panic! This doesn’t mean you’ve done anything wrong. You can read more about the steps to take for verification here.

Note that your SAR will not contain the amount of federal student aid you’re eligible for; that information will come directly from each college you’re accepted to in the form of financial aid award letters.

Step 8 – Make Any Changes Necessary

Once you receive your SAR report, if the information is not correct, you can simply sign back into your FAFSA account (remember that FSA ID!) and select “Make FAFSA Corrections.”  

You can also make more substantial changes, for instance, if your financial situation has significantly changed. Here’s more information on exactly how to make changes to your FAFSA after it’s filed.

Step 9 – Receive and Interpret Your Financial Award Letters

When you get accepted to a college (yay!) you’ll also receive a financial aid award letter detailing your financial aid package, which is determined in large part by your FAFSA. 

Essentially, your financial aid package is the total amount of money a school is willing to provide you, including federal aid and the school’s own financial aid (which can vary greatly school to school). 

In terms of the federal aid you receive, there are 3 categories you may see reflected in your letter, which we touched on earlier:

Grants

Here’s an overview of federal grants, but one of the most common types is the need-based Federal Pell Grant, designed for lower income undergraduate students. Pell grants range from about $500 to $5,500 depending on need. 

There are also grants available for students whose parents have served in the military and for students who are taking courses to become teachers.

Grants do not need to be repaid. 

Loans 

Here’s an overview of federal loans. The U.S Department of Education uses a system called the William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program, under which there are 4 types of loans:

Direct Subsidized Loans for undergraduate students in financial need.
Direct Unsubsidized Loans for undergraduate, graduate, or career college students that are not based on financial need.
Direct PLUS Loans for graduate or professional students and for parents of dependent undergrads to help pay for educational expenses not covered by other types of financial aid. These loans are contingent upon a credit check and are not need-based.
Direct Consolidation Loans which allow you to combine all of your federal loans into one single loan

 Loans do have to be repaid over a specified period of time with interest paid.

Work Study

Here’s an overview of work study funding, which essentially means that your school provides you a part-time job to help pay for school. 

Work-study jobs pay at least minimum wage, and vary in the total amount paid based on whether you’re an undergraduate or graduate student.

How to Understand Your Financial Aid Award Letter

Overall, financial aid award letters can be a little tricky to understand, so we recommend actually talking to a financial aid advisor at each college you’re applying to. That way you can be absolutely sure how much money you’re receiving, what you’ll be responsible for paying back, and so on. 

Generally, though, you’ll want to ask yourself the following questions while reading your financial aid award letter: 

Does your financial aid package cover the full cost of attendance with grants, work study, and scholarships? If not, you’ll need to cover the remaining costs, look for additional scholarships, or apply for student loans. 
What isn’t covered by financial aid? For example, will you receive any money to go towards housing or books? If not, you’ll need to factor in those extra costs on your own to decide if attending that college is still affordable with only financial aid.
Does your financial aid package reflect you and your family’s current financial status? If not, you may want to appeal your financial aid package.
Step 10 – Appeal Your Financial Aid Award (If Necessary) 

If you did not receive enough financial aid to afford the total cost of a particular college, the first thing you should do is contact the financial aid office. You always have the option of appealing for more money, which is something many students don’t know. However, every school has a different policy for appealing for more financial assistance, and you will want to follow the protocol exactly. 

It can be very tricky to receive more financial aid, but it’s not impossible. You may be asked by a financial aid advisor to write a letter of appeal explaining why you need more money. A very good reason to write an appeal letter is if a family or life circumstance has changed since you filed your FAFSA. 

For example, if you’ve had a death in your immediate family or one of your parent’s recently lost their job, you may be a strong candidate to receive more aid.

Here’s a great video from The University Network that goes into how to write a financial aid appeal letter:

FAFSA FAQs

Here’s a collection of FAFSA FAQs for your reference, but the following are some of the most common questions students have about the FAFSA and federal financial aid.

If FAFSA free?

It sure is (it’s not just a clever name). You don’t have to pay for FAFSA. So, there should be no explicit or hidden fees to file a FAFSA. If for some reason you are asked to provide payment to file, you are not using a legitimate FAFSA application!

Is FAFSA required to go to college?

No. You can go to college without filling out the FAFSA. But if you’re looking for financial aid of any variety, you’ll want to fill one out. Federal, state, and campus-based financial aid award packages are generated using FAFSA. So, if you need money for college, FAFSA is where to start!

Is FAFSA worth filling out if your parents make a lot of money?
Yes, yes, 1000 times yes! There is no limit on income for the FAFSA. And many students miss out on the FAFSA because they assume they’re not eligible for financial aid or they’re intimidated by the lengthy application process. But the federal government has billions of dollars to give in student aid—don’t leave your share on the table!
How do I accept financial aid?

Here are the official instructions for accepting your financial aid. Basically, you’ll have to inform your college directly about which aid you want to accept. Each school has its own process, so read your reward letter carefully. For loans, you will be asked to sign a promissory note, promising to repay your loans. 

Do I have to accept all of my financial aid?

Nope! Only accept what you need. A good rule of thumb when it comes to accepting financial aid is to start by accepting the money that you don’t need to pay back. Then you can decide how much, if any, of the loans you will need to accept to cover the cost of school.

How do I receive my financial aid?

Okay, so you’ve accepted your financial aid. Now, how do you actually get the money? Each college may have a separate protocol for how the money is actually disbursed, here’s a solid overview about receiving your federal aid. Generally, the money you receive covers the whole academic year and is distributed in two chunks from the federal government through your college and into a college account that you can then use to pay for courses, etc.

Can FAFSA give you a full-ride?

It is possible to get a full-ride (i.e. having all of your college expenses covered) through financial aid in the form of grants and scholarships. But it isn’t likely. Typically, for that to happen you’ll need to apply for and win competitive full-ride scholarships in addition to filing the FAFSA. You can also create your own “full-ride” by winning multiple scholarships that add up to the total amount you need to pay for college.

Beyond FAFSA: Other Ways to Pay for College

For many students, federal aid does not cover the total cost of college attendance and living expenses. But, you can cover those additional costs and work towards graduating debt free from college with scholarships! 

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips and strategies on things like how to get a student loan, find tuition reimbursement jobs, and win popular scholarships like the McDonald’s Scholarships and Taco Bell Scholarship. 

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Going away to college is a huge life change. We know firsthand how exciting and intimidating it can be simultaneously, so we’ve got you covered with some of our absolute favorite tips for making the most of our your first year in college!

Specifically, we’ll be sharing our top tips to help you:

Plan your academic life
Build good study habits
Navigate your college campus 
Prepare for dorm life 
Create a fun and supportive social circle 
Stay on top of your physical and mental health 
Manage and make money 

Let’s get right to it!

1. Academics

Let’s talk about your academic life since that’s the #1 reason you’re there, after all! 

Get The Most Out of Your Classes

First of all, GO. We repeat: Go. To. Class. Your tuition is expensive and your education is invaluable. Also, it’s nearly impossible to get good grades and keep up your GPA if you regularly cut class. This is particularly important if you’ve received any merit-based financial aid. 

Read Your Syllabi Thoroughly

Your course syllabus is the document your instructor provides on the first day of class that includes all of the relevant information you’ll need for the course: contact information, policies, due dates, etc. Even if they seem boring, make sure to read each one thoroughly so you don’t miss any crucial information; your instructors may or may not go over all of their contents on the first day. Be especially mindful of policies about missed classes, late homework, etc.

Engage

The more you engage in your classes, the more you’ll get out of them. Everyone’s personality is different, so this doesn’t mean that you have to raise your hand and offer your opinions constantly if that’s not your style. But you should definitely make a commitment to keep your phone put away (we know, we know, it’s very hard), to listen actively, and to take notes. Trust us, the notes will come in handy later! If your instructors allow it and you prefer typing your notes, go for it, but we also believe in the power of taking notes by hand for optimal digestion of the material.

Get to Know Your Peers

Class is actually a great place to make friends at college. And it’s always nice to have people you can reach out to for clarification on assignments, to borrow a pencil from, etc. Your classes will be more enjoyable if you have a good relationship with your peers.

Get to Know Your Instructors

This one is huge. The better communication you have with your instructors, the better your chances of excelling in your classes. It’s their job to support you and they are all required to keep office hours (which each instructor should include in their syllabus). It can be intimidating, but try not to be shy when it comes to asking questions or getting additional help—your instructors want you to succeed!

Also, if you’re struggling to make deadlines and need an extension, are sick for a protracted amount of time, or have other extenuating life circumstances, reach out to your instructors as soon as possible! They can help you discuss your options. Most instructors are willing to be flexible, but you can’t ask for an extension after an assignment is already late. Be proactive in your communication with your instructors and they’ll be much more willing to work with you. 

Build Your Schedule Wisely

Here are some things to take into consideration when you’re choosing your classes and building your schedule:

Your sleep habits 
Your job schedule (if you have one or are planning on getting one)
Your attention span and learning styles

Basically, know yourself. If you’re a night owl and run the risk of cutting a class that starts at 8:30am, try to schedule your classes later in the day. If you’ll mentally check out in a 3-hour night class, try not to take one. If you’re also juggling a job, make sure that you don’t overload any of your days and risk burnout.

Obviously, course availability will dictate your schedule to some degree, but try to take these factors into consideration. The more energetic and alert you are for your classes, the more you’ll take away from them and the better you’ll likely perform in them.

Also, we highly recommend taking your general education (gen-ed) requirements first. You know, all the core curriculum courses that you’re required to take in addition to the classes in your major of choice. Many schools require that you take these classes first, but not all of them do.

Through taking gen eds, many students discover that they’re actually passionate about a different subject than they originally intended to major in, so this will save you time and money by preventing a major change down the line. Also, gen eds are typically more easily transferable to other colleges than courses in your major. 

Get to Know Your Academic Advisor

Depending on the size of your college, you may or may not be in close contact with your advisor as a freshman. That said, you can contact your admissions department for your college (e.g. Liberal Arts) and request to meet with yours.

This person should be your #1 resource and advocate when it comes to selecting your courses, mapping your overall academic plan, and helping you make any and all academic decisions. They’re a great resource for any academic questions you may have (Should you change majors? Can you minor in art history? Can you take an independent study?) so make sure to have their contact info handy, and that you use it often. 

Keep an Open Mind

In your classes, you’ll be introduced to all kinds of new thoughts, ideas, and arguments—some that may be new to you or that you may be resistant to at first. Try to keep an open mind about anything you learn. You don’t have to adopt all of the ideas you’re exposed to, but keeping an open mind will make you a more critical thinker, and you’ll get the most out of your education.

2. Study Smarter, Not Harder
Set The Atmosphere

We’re firm believers that studying (and doing homework, etc.) is much more productive and enjoyable if you like where you’re studying. Is there a particular arm chair in the library you like? A cafe on campus? Find a place that feels good to you and make that a regular study spot. 

Use Learning Support Tools

There are all kinds of great resources out there to help you study and complete homework more effectively. GoConqr is an awesome resource for creating flashcards, mind maps, and slides, and Quizlet is an old favorite for generating flashcards, practice quizzes/tests, and more.

While we highly recommend getting a leg up from learning support tools, we do caution you against leaning too heavily on resources like Sparknotes and similar. These are popular among high schoolers and can be helpful for getting clear on plot points. But at college level, you’ll be asked to perform much more complex and unique analysis than is offered in these resources, so they’re not substitutes for actually reading your assigned work! 

Edit Your Written Work

In college, it definitely pays to do that extra round of proofing! College instructors read a lot of work by students, and many have pretty low tolerance for grammar and style errors, which can actually get in the way of making your point clearly. Even if you’ve got a great editorial eye, consider using a proofreading and editing software like Grammarly.

Avoid Procrastination

Benjamin Franklin said, “Don’t put off until tomorrow what you can do today” and this is still some of the best advice we’ve ever heard. Here’s why: you’re in college. Tons of fun social events are going to spontaneously come up that you want to participate in. And when they do, you don’t want to be bogged down with homework that you could have easily done prior and have to decline. Here’s more great information on why we are naturally inclined to procrastinate, as well as some great tips for how to stop procrastinating.

Study Abroad If You Can

First of all, you won’t likely have the option to study abroad your first year, we’re including this pointer here because you’ll want to start looking into it as early as possible when choosing courses for the following year.

Studying abroad can be pricey and certainly isn’t an option for everyone, but if it’s a possibility that intrigues you and it is feasible, go for it! The idea of living in another country may be scary but the experiences and perspectives gained are truly unparalleled. 

Many study abroad programs cost the same as your regular tuition and housing, so make sure you look into all of the specifics with your college and/or department, because it may be more doable than you think. (And psst… Scholly Search is also a great resource for finding scholarships that are specifically geared for studying abroad!)

Not sure if studying abroad is for you? Take this “Should I Study Abroad?” Quiz to help you decide.

3. On and Around Campus
Have Your School Calendar at the Ready

You’ll want to know what’s going on in your new world. Bookmark your college’s calendar on your computer’s desktop or tape a calendar of important dates on your dorm wall next to your desk.

There are some really important deadlines to be aware of when it comes to adding and dropping classes, for example, without being charged tuition for a class you don’t end up taking. There are also plenty of social events you may want to attend: Homecoming, on-campus concerts, talks given by guest speakers, etc.

Another way to get this important information, of course, is by joining and following your college’s social media pages and groups and checking them regularly.

Get Friendly With Campus Employees

Get to know the security guard in your dorm, the attendant serving you lunch in the cafeteria, the librarian helping you find resources for your research paper, and so on. This is a simple way to create a tighter, friendlier, more connected community. Being nice to the people doing jobs to help make your campus run smoothly is the polite thing to do, and it may even come back to you in the form of sweet favors (think: extra mashed potatoes on your cafeteria tray). 

Explore

Get to know your campus! Regardless of where you go to school, there are really lovely places on campus that may not even be anywhere near your dorm or classes. Have you popped in the music hall? What about the rec center? Do you ever just indulge in lying around the quad? The campus will feel safer (more on campus safety later!) and more like home if you really take the time to enjoy it. 

The same goes for the area surrounding your campus. If you’re in a small town, your college campus may be THE center of activity, but there still may be some restaurants, shops, or other activities nearby that are worth checking out. Or perhaps there’s some really beautiful nature worth exploring. 

And if you’re in a mid or major metropolitan area, there are certainly all kinds of things to do off campus. You can explore museums, go to plays, see live music, and so on. Especially if you attend college somewhere other than where you grew up, now’s the time to experience something new! Try getting a Lonely Planet (or similar) guide to your city or state and exploring it like a tourist might. Your entire college experience will be enhanced if you like where you live.

Use Your Student Discount

Piggybacking on the point above, many businesses around college campuses provide student discounts (which usually require you to show your student ID). Movie theaters, pizza places, cafes, bookstores, and so on all often offer discounts to college students—take advantage of these deals! 

4. Dorm Life
Maintain a Healthy Relationship With Your Roommate(s) 

This starts before you even meet to get a sense of one another. More than likely, you’ve already chatted on the phone (or via social media) before you met, sometime during the summer. If you haven’t yet, discuss what you’ll each be bringing to the dorms (so that you don’t end up with 2 microwaves and 2 mini-fridges!) and what will be fair game for the other to use.

Maybe you’ll hit it off immediately and seem like old pals, or maybe you’ll just be courteous roommates and not necessarily friends. Either situation is okay. 

Living with other people (especially if they’re complete strangers) can be super fun, but it can also pose its own set of challenges. What’s critical is that early on, whether before you meet or in the first couple days of meeting one another, that you set some “ground rules” (in other words, healthy boundaries) about your shared space. Compromise on these topics and stick to what you agree upon. You’ll get along much better if you respect each others’ spaces! 

This is a great list of questions to ask your college roommate(s) but here a brief “cheat sheet” of must-discuss topics:

Class schedules 
Dorm room setup/configuration (beds, desks, etc.) 
Sleeping habits
Noise/distractions (music, TV, etc.)
Chores/cleanliness
Shared vs. personal items in the room 
Guests (day, evening, and overnight)
Study habits
Diet (allergies, restrictions, cooking, etc.)

Remember, above all else, communication is key! With a clear understanding of each other and each other’s boundaries, your living situation should be a breeze!

Make Your Dorm Room Your Home

Dorms are notoriously small and sharing a space can definitely cramp your decorating style, but the more you feel at home in yours, the happier you’ll be overall. A few creature comforts can really help you make the space feel warm and homey. Here are a few suggestions for things that will make your dorm room more hospitable:

A mattress pad (dorm beds can be very firm.) and a good pillow
Nice/ambient lighting (string lights, a nice night stand lamp, a salt rock lamp, etc.)
Photos of friends from home
Plants 
Comfy blankets 
A couple of sentimental items (but not too many, you don’t want to crowd the space)
Tapestries and artwork 
Bring These Essential Items With You

Beyond making your dorm feel like your own unique space, there are a bunch of things that you’ll need (or really want… trust us!) for making your college and dorm experience as pleasant as possible. 

This is an amazing, highly comprehensive list of college essentials, but here are some of our favorite “bonus” (and perhaps less obvious) suggestions:

Flip flops for the shower 
Good headphones (or even noise cancelling headphones if you’re a light sleeper or need silence when you study)
At least one (ideally more) reusable water bottle
A water filtering pitcher 
An eye mask if you’re light sensitive 
Comfortable walking shoes
Extra socks and underwear (you may get busy and do laundry less frequently than you probably should)
A lanyard/holder for your student ID so you don’t lose it (these days, your ID often doubles as an access key to campus buildings)
Wet wipes (they work for everything from hygiene to dorm cleaning)
A basic first aid and sewing kit
Know Your RA

Your RA, or “resident advisor” is a (usually older/upperclassman) student who lives in your dorm and helps organize activities and oversee the goings-on of the dorm. Make sure you know your RA by name and know their room number and contact information. You can go to your RA with any questions or concerns you have about dorm or campus life and they’ll help you find the right resources.  

5. Social Life
Avoid Staying in Your Cocoon

College is an amazing time for expanding your social circle! Even if you consider yourself shy or introverted, challenge yourself to get out of your comfort zone (and dorm room—even though we stand by making it homey). 

Many people advise against entering college in a serious, long-distance romantic relationship… or leaping into a serious relationship right away. Of course you can date, but the idea is to be mindful of how much time you’re spending with only one person. 

Frankly, the same goes for your roommate(s). It’s great if you hit it off, but you’ll want to branch out beyond just the peers you live with.

Join Extracurricular Activities 

We can’t stress this more. On-campus groups, organizations, clubs, and teams are perhaps the best way to meet like-minded individuals and make strong connections. 

If you have an activity you’re already passionate about (yoga, technology, student government, etc.) or were involved in during high school, join your college’s version. Or, try something out of your comfort zone that seems appealing to you; colleges have literally hundreds of activities and groups to join, so make sure to take a look at them all on the school’s website. 

An added bonus about extracurricular activities is that you can add them to your resume and they can make it easier to get a job after you graduate. 

Stay in Touch

Your family and friends back home love and miss you, so make sure to carve out some time for phone calls and/or video chats. And even if you didn’t go far away for college, your family will appreciate updates from you! 

6. Your Overall Well Being
Use Your Campus Resources

College campuses have many campus resources that are put in place to help ensure your overall health, safety, and wellbeing. 

For example:

Gyms or fitness centers 
Career counseling center
Writing center
Mental health services 
Campus healthcare 
Campus security 

All of these resources are super important and we highly recommend saving the number for each directly into your phone. Typically these resources (or at least some of their offerings) are included in your tuition, so don’t be shy about using them! 

Practice Self Care

“Self care” is a buzzword thrown around a lot these days, but what does it actually mean? It means taking the time to make sure you’re nurturing yourself so that you stay physically, mentally, and emotionally healthy. It bears repeating that college is a massive life change and it can be easy to feel stressed or to overextend yourself while you learn the ropes.

So as a freshman, start your college career off right by drinking plenty of water, eating nutritious foods (it helps to keep healthy snacks in your dorm room so you don’t consistently cave on late-night pizza while you’re studying), and sleeping enough. Young bodies bounce back, but over time, sleep deprivation can be detrimental to your health. So avoid late all-nighter cramming sessions and too many late nights out with friends; your body will thank you for it.

Stay Safe!!

This is perhaps the MOST important advice of all. You’re living independently for what is probably the first time in your whole life and with this independence comes the responsibility to stay vigilant about your own safety.

Don’t walk around alone at night, on or off campus. Travel in groups or use a rideshare app to get a ride. In fact, many colleges have campus security services that offer rides to students around campus; take them up on this amazing offer!

If you see or hear about any suspicious activity on campus or anything that makes you uncomfortable, report it to campus security right away.

Especially if you’re traveling at night, always let someone know where you’re going and when you’re expected to arrive.

Here’s a great list of ways to stay safe on college campuses, and we encourage you to reach out to any of the people in your support network (RA, instructors, advisors, etc.) if you’re feeling unsafe in any way, shape, or form.

So there you have it, your complete guide to your freshman year in college! Congratulations on this new life chapter and best of luck!

7. Money
Monitor Your Financial Aid

By now you likely have most of your financial aid figured out for your freshman year of college. But it never hurts to double check!

Once you’ve started college, continue to check with your college’s financial aid department for important deadlines for things like the FAFSA, work study programs, and federal student loans.

As a reminder, you’ll need to apply for FAFSA every year that you’re in college. The new application usually opens in October. And you’re more likely to get the best need-based financial aid package available to you (read: less loans and more grants, scholarships, work study) if you submit your application early. 

So, open up your calendar now and set a reminder! Because the benefits of submitting the FAFSA early are too good to accidentally miss. 

Continue to Apply for Scholarships

Did you know you can keep winning scholarships while you’re in college?! Most students aren’t. And they miss out on the opportunity to win scholarships that could help bring them closer to graduating debt free. But, since you’re reading this as an incoming freshman, you still have the opportunity to do things differently! 

You can use Scholly Search to find amazing scholarship opportunities for current college students. Once you’ve found a few scholarships that you’d like to apply to, check out our top 15 tips on how to apply for scholarships to make sure you’re giving yourself the best shot of winning that free money!  

Create a Budget

We’re sure you know the stereotype. College students are notoriously known for being broke, eating endless packages of Ramen noodles, and struggling to buy even the most basic necessities. But it doesn’t have to be this way! At least not if you create and stick to a practical budget. 

We know that budgeting is hard. But thanks to apps like Rocket Money and Mint, it’s a lot easier than it used to be. 

Generally, you’ll want to take a moment to look at how much money you’ll have coming in every month. Then, use one of those apps to track your spending, set allowances, get alerts when you’re in danger of missing your spending goals. 

If you’re thinking, “Nice… but that’s not gonna work for me…,” we understand! In that case, consider opening up multiple bank accounts to divide up your money. Have one for spending and one for saving that you don’t touch unless you absolutely need it. 

Be Careful with Credit Cards

As a new college student, you’re likely to receive credit card offers. But be careful! While it’s great to use a credit card to begin building your credit, going into massive amounts of credit card debt is not! 

Unless you pay your balance in full every month, you’ll be charged interest that can quickly make even the smallest balances overwhelming and hard to pay off. Our advice: only use the credit card to buy things you can pay for at the end of the month. 

Find College Student-Friendly Work  

If you find you need some extra income while in college, you may consider getting a job. Luckily, there are jobs that are perfect for college students. 

We’d recommend looking for jobs that offer one of the following benefits:

A flexible schedule (we list a bunch of jobs like this in our guides on how to make an extra $500 a month and online jobs for teens!)  
Tuition reimbursement (we’ve also compiled a list of 50 companies with tuition assistance programs!)
A connection to your major or desired career path so you can begin building your resume 
Consider Investing

You might not know it, but college is a perfect time to start investing in the stock market. Why? Because the earlier you start investing the more money you can earn from your investments over the long-term. 

Plus, it’s never been easier to start investing — even if you only have a little money to invest and a beginner level knowledge of how the stock market works. 

For example, there are micro-investing apps like Acorns and Stash that make it easy to invest by rounding up your credit and/or debit card purchases to the nearest dollar. Once you’ve accumulated a small amount (e.g. $5), they’ll automatically invest it for you. 

You can also easily invest with robo-advisors like Betterment or online brokerages like Charles Schwab for a relatively low cost. 

But we have to tell you that investing is always a risk. There’s a chance you could lose your money depending on how things go in the stock market. So, do a bit of research before making your first investment. If you’re not sure where to start, check out our beginner’s guide to investing for college students. 

Final Thoughts

You have a lot to look forward to with the start of your freshman year! You also have a lot to prepare to make sure it goes as smoothly as possible. 

We hope the information we shared here helps you enter your first year of college prepared and with confidence. Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Are you creative? Skilled at a certain craft? Or just willing to put in a little effort and a couple hours a week? If you said yes to any of those, you can be making an extra $500+ per month!

After all, it’s 2022. And doing things like working as a remote freelancer, using apps to find gig work, and making money online have never been easier. 

The best part: this is true no matter if you’re a high school student, college student, recent grad, or full-time worker. Anyone can make extra money these days! 

The only thing is that you have to pick the one or two money-making methods that will work best for you in the long run. 

To help you figure that part out, we’ll be sharing 37 of the best ways to make or save — at least — an extra $500 per month. We’ll also be sharing the apps, websites, and additional resources that make each of those methods incredibly easy to start ASAP. 

Sound good? Awesome! Let’s jump right in.

37 Ways to Make an Extra $500 a Month

Below, you’re about to find some of the easiest ways you can get started making extra money. Some you’ll likely have heard of or maybe even tried before. And others could be entirely new. 

Some may also take some time to build before you see a profit. While others you could start earning money from today. You also may need to combine two or more methods to get to a full $500 a month. 

Some you may also need to 18 years or older. So, if you’re still in high school, you may want check out our list of online jobs for teens instead.

Either way, we encourage you to go through the entire list, pick one or two ideas that interest you, and commit to making it work!

#1 Resell Your Clothes and Accessories

What is it?

Reselling is one of the easiest ways to make some quick extra money. All you have to do is go through your unused or unwanted things, determine what someone else might find valuable, and set up an attractive ad on an online marketplace. 

If your closet is full of old or unused clothing and accessories that are in good condition and from high-quality brands, that’s a good place to start! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To start reselling your clothes and accessories, create an account and start listing your items on reselling platforms like: 

Poshmark
ThredUp
Depop 
Tradesy

Where you can learn more

Here’s How to Sell Clothes Online and Make Money in 2021 

#2 Resell Your Electronics 

What is it?

You can also resell old and unused electronics. This is a great way to make extra money if you’ve got a bunch of old cell phones, tablets, video games, watches, etc. that you no longer use or want. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To start reselling your electronics, create an account  and start listing your items on one of the platforms below:

Decluttr
Gazelle
Glyde
SellCell
Swappa
Craigslist
Facebook Marketplace

Where you can learn more

11 Best Places to Sell Your Used Electronics in 2021 

#3 Resell Furniture and Collectables

What is it?

It’s also incredibly easy to resell old furniture and collectables. And sometimes you don’t even need to own these things to start! Whenever people move out of their home or apartment, there are often items that they no longer want and can’t sell quickly enough. So, what do they do? 

They list them on places like Facebook MarketPlace and Craigslist for cheap or free! All you have to do is go pick up the item and resell it on one of the platforms below. 

You can also usually find things you can buy and then resell for a higher price at places like garage sales, antique stores, and second hand stores.

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Once you’ve determined what you want to sell, you can list everything on platforms like: 

LetGo
OfferUp
eBay 
Craigslist 
Facebook MarketPlace 

Where you can learn more

How to Resell for a Side Hustle (and Make Serious Bank) 

#4 Rent Out Your Stuff

What is it? 

You probably have a ton of things lying around your home that you don’t really use anymore. We’re talking about things like power tools, kitchen appliances, and old sports equipment. Well, you can rent those things out regularly and make easy money! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To get started, all you need to do is set up an account with a platform like FriendWithA. Then, just pick the things you’re comfortable renting and set your price. 

Where you can learn more

12 Ways to rent your possessions

#5 Dog Sitting and Walking

What is it? 

If you love dogs, this one’s a no-brainer. People will hire you to help walk and take care of their dogs when they’re too busy. And some dog walkers report making up to $1000/month! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To get started, you just need to set up a profile with one of the companies listed below and pass a background check. That’s it! 

Where you can look for work

Rover
Wag

Where you can learn more

How to Make Extra Money as a Dog Walker and Sitter 

#6 Cancel Unused Subscriptions 

What is it? 

Signing up for free trials of subscriptions to things like TV and music streaming services is fun. Forgetting to cancel the ones you don’t actually want and constantly getting charged monthly without even realizing it… not so much!  Luckily, there are services that can help you manage, cancel, and save money on your subscriptions.

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To get started, you sign up for an account with a service like Rocket Money that can also help you do things like negotiate your bills for lower rates and track your spending. 

Where you can learn more

I Saved $468 a Month by Cutting My Subscriptions and Recurring Fees 

#7 Online Surveys 

What is it? 

Companies will pay you to take surveys to collect feedback on their products, services, promotions, and ideas. You may not make a full $500 a month from this method alone, but it’s an easy one to do whenever you have spare time. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To get started, all you need to do is create a profile and fill out some demographic information on one or more of the platforms below. 

Where you can look for work

Survey Junkie
Swagbucks
InboxDollars
Premise

Where you can learn more

How To Earn Money By Taking Online Surveys 

#8 Test Websites

What is it? 

Sometimes companies want or need to make sure the design and navigation of their website are intuitive for their target users. To learn what they can improve, these companies pay people like you to test the website and provide feedback. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

No special skills are required for this side hustle. Just sign up with one of the platforms below. 

Where you can look for work

UserTesting 
UserLytics
IntelliZoomPanel
TryMyUI

Where you can learn more

How and Where You Can Make Money Testing Websites 

#9 House Sitting 

What is it? 

While away from home, some homeowners will hire a house-sitters to do things like water plants, collect mail, keep things tidy, and care for pets. If you’re trustworthy, responsible, and know where to look, you can make decent money as a house-sitter no matter where you are in the world.

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Getting started as a housesitter is easy and, generally, doesn’t require any special skills apart from being responsible and good with pets. If that sounds like you, sign up for a paid membership with one or more of the sites below, complete a background check, and then have access to an unlimited number of house sitting jobs. 

Where you can look for work

TrustedHousesitters
HouseCarers
Luxury House Sitting
House Sitters America
Care.com

Where you can learn more

What is house sitting and what do house sitters do?

#10 House/Handy Work 

What is it? 

A lot of people have at least one or two household tasks that they either hate doing or just don’t have the time to do. You know: things like cleaning gutters, installing household electronics, building furniture, or even just keeping things tidy around the house. Thanks to a few apps, you can get paid to do one or all of those tasks for them. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Obviously, you need to be skilled in whatever service you’d like to provide. But other than that, you just need to create a free profile on one of the platforms below. 

Where you can look for work

TaskRabbit
Zaarly
Handy 
Thumbtack 

Where you can learn more

The Ultimate TaskRabbit Review: These Two Taskers’ Actual Experience 

#11 Food and Grocery Delivery

What is it?

This one’s also pretty popular — especially during this past year that likely required you to spend more time at home than you’d like. So, we’ll be brief. People want food or groceries delivered to their door. They pay you to pick up and deliver it. All on your own schedule. Enough said.  

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

You’ll need to sign up with one of the platforms listed below, have a reliable method of transportation (car, motorbike, bicycle), have a valid license for that method of transportation, and pass a background check. 

Where you can look for work

DoorDash 
Uber Eats
GrubHub
Instacart 
Postmates 
Shipt
Caviar
goPuff

Where you can learn more

13 Ways to Make Money Delivering Food, Packages, and More 

#12 Drive for Uber or Lyft

What is it? 

This is another popular way to make money. So, we won’t spend too much time explaining. But, in case you didn’t know, it’s worth mentioning that the average person who drives regularly for Uber or Lyft makes a little over $350 a month. So, you may need to combine this method with another one in this article to achieve that extra $500 a month. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To drive for either platform, you’ll need a car in good condition that has four doors and meets state requirements. You’ll also need to have a valid driver’s license, pass a screening process, and have at least the minimum car insurance required by your state. Each service also has a few additional requirements that you can check out on their website below. 

Uber
Lyft 

Where you can learn more

How to Become an Uber, Lyft Driver 

#13 Cash Back Apps

What is it? 

Cash back apps reward you for using their app to do online shopping. Every time you make a purchase, you’ll receive either credits you can redeem at select stores or cash to spend how you please. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To start earning cash back on your purchases, download one or more apps like: 

Dosh
Drop
Rakuten

Where you can learn more

How to Use Cash-Back Apps to Save Money Daily 

#14 Credit Card Balance Transfer

What is it? 

If you have high-interest credit card debt, you may be able to save some money by transferring your balance over to a card that offers zero interest for a certain introductory period (e.g. 18 months). By doing this, you can continue to pay down your balance while saving money that would have otherwise been spent on interest. 

Where you can learn more

How Credit Card Balance Transfers Work 

#15 Credit Card Rewards

What is it? 

By using certain credit cards, you can earn points or cash back every time you spend. Depending on the card, you can expect anywhere between 1-5% in cashback — which, unless you charge a lot to your card monthly, probably won’t get you $500 a month. But sometimes, the rewards (to be used for things like travel, store discounts, and more) can help you save some serious cash in the long run. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To qualify for the best rewards credit cards, you’ll need to have good to excellent credit. For some cards, you may also need to pay an annual fee. 

Where you can learn more

How To Use A Credit Card To Make Money And Earn Extra Cash

#16 Freelance Audio Transcription

What is it? 

Some companies need audio files to be transcribed and captioned. As a freelance audio transcriber, you listen to the audio, accurately type what you hear, and create polished transcriptions for the company to use however they need. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

For this job, you’ll need a good pair of headphones, your computer or laptop, high-speed internet, typing skills, and good listening skills in English and/or any foreign languages you speak fluently. 

Where you can look for work

Rev
QA World
TranscribeMe 
GoTranscript 
Upwork  
Fiverr 

Where you can learn more

5 Platforms Where You Can Earn Money by Transcribing Audio 

#17 Freelance Virtual Assistant 

What is it? 

Virtual assistants help busy professionals with a wide variety of tasks. For example, you may be asked to do things like admin work, data entry, research, creative content creation, website management, data analytics, and more. And because there will always be entrepreneurs, executives, and professionals who need help, this job is always in demand! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Because the services you offer as a virtual assistant can vary, so will the necessary skill set. But, even with just a few basic professional and technical skills, you can get started right now. To easily find clients, check out one of the platforms below.   

Where you can look for work

Upwork
PeoplePerHour
Indeed 
VA Networking 

Where you can learn more

How To Become A Virtual Assistant 

#18 Apply for a Student Loan Forgiveness Program

What is it? 

If you’re a college graduate with student loans, you know the monthly bills can be costly. But did you know that if you work in certain fields – such as nursing, education, and law – you can get some of your balance forgiven? If not, you do now! And with your overall balance lowered, you can either end up paying less every month or pay off your student loans faster than you expected. 

What do you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)? 

To get started, first check the article below to see if you’re in one of the professions that qualify. Then, you’ll need to apply directly for student loan forgiveness with the relevant program. 

Where you can learn more

Do You Qualify For Student Loan Forgiveness?

#19 Change Your Federal Student Loan Repayment Plan

What is it? 

If you have federal student loans, there are a variety of different payment plans you can choose from. But, for some reason, a lot of people don’t go through the trouble of choosing the best plan for their current financial situation. As a result, you can end up paying way more than you need to each month. Luckily, it’s never too late to change that. And we can help! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To get started, all you need is information and details about your federal student loans. We take care of the rest. 

Where you can learn more

Scholly PayOff | Reduce Your Student Loan Debt Today 

#20 Refinance Your Private Student Loans 

What is it? 

When you refinance your student loans, you trade your existing loan for a new one with a private financial institution. By doing this, you can benefit from lower interest rates. This can lower your monthly payments and save you money over time.  Refinancing is typically best for people who have private student loans. 

If you have federal student loans, refinancing probably isn’t a good idea. That’s because federal student loans already have relatively low-interest rates and the potential for student loan forgiveness after a set number of years. While uncertain, there is also still the chance that some or all of your federal student loan debt could be canceled. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To refinance your student loans, you’ll need to contact one or more private lenders who refinance student loans to find which one can offer you the best terms and conditions. 

Where you can learn more

How To Refinance Student Loans And Reduce Your Monthly Payments

#21 Babysitting / Nanny 

What is it? 

You for sure know this one. Busy parents and guardians need someone to help with childcare. And you’re a trustworthy person to look after and play with the kids for a set period of time. You may have done this for free for your relatives. But you can turn it into a business, too! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To succeed as a babysitter or nanny, you’ll definitely need to be good with kids. It’s also a good idea to take a babysitter course and get certifications for CPR and general first aid. 

Where you can look for work

Care.com
Sittercity
UrbanSitter 

Where you can learn more

How to Become a Babysitter 

#22 Online Language Tutor or Teacher

What is it? 

All over the world, people are looking to learn and practice foreign languages. And you can help them (and get paid!) — even if you only speak English and don’t have any formal teaching certification. You don’t even need to leave your home. Because all of you can meet with all of your students online. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Becoming an online language tutor is pretty simple. You just need to sign up with one of the platforms below, create an introduction video for students to watch, and set your schedule and price per lesson. If you have a formal teaching qualification (e.g. TEFL), you can also sign up to be an online language teacher and charge more per lesson. 

As far as equipment, you probably already have everything you need. Most teachers just use their laptop, a simple microphone (like the one on a pair of headphones), and a high-speed internet connection. Of course, you can also invest more into your business as you progress. But those basics are all you need to get started! 

Where you can look for work

italki
Preply
Verbling
Vipkid
Cambly
AmazingTalker 

Where you can learn more

How to Make Money from Languages: Become a Language Tutor 

#23 Freelance Editing & Proofreading

What is it? 

Do you consider yourself a spelling and grammar nerd? Well, you can make money for it! That’s right. There are tons of aspiring authors, bloggers, students, companies, and more who are looking for someone like you to help polish their writing. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To be a freelance editor and proofreader, the most important thing to have is a method of finding clients. Check out one of the platforms below. Or build your own website to market your services. 

Of course, you’ll also need to be skilled in editing and proofreading for spelling, grammar, style, tone in one or more languages. 

Where you can look for work

Upwork
Fiverr 
PeoplePerHour 
ProBlogger 

Where you can learn more

How to Become a Successful Freelance Editor and Proofreader 

#24 Academic Tutoring

What is it? 

Students of all ages need help studying for standardized exams, getting ahead in their classes at school, writing papers, and completing assignments. If you consider yourself knowledgeable in any academic field, you can find students who will pay for your help. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To get started, you just need to be confident that you can teach and explain difficult concepts in one or more academic subjects. Then, go sign up to tutor and find students on one of the websites below. 

Where you can look for work

Wyzant 
Tutor.com
TutorMe 
VaristyTutors 
Preply

Where you can learn more

How to Start a Tutoring Business

#25 Design and Sell Your Own Merch

What is it?

Ever have a creative idea for a design for something like a T-shirt, hoodie, phone case, tote bag, leggings, or mug? Well, you can create the design (or hire someone else to do it), have it put on the merch, and then sell it online using Amazon, eBay, or your own online store! 

And thanks to companies like Printful, Teespring, and Amazon, you don’t even need to buy the merch yourself. It can all be printed, packaged, and shipped on demand without you ever needing to touch the physical product! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

For this to work, you’ll need at least one design to put on your merch. If you don’t have the skills to do this, you can hire a graphic designer to bring your idea to life. 

Then, you’ll need to either set up an online store or register to sell your merch on a site like Amazon. You may also decide to set up accounts on social media to market and advertise your products.

Where you can learn more

How To Start A Clothing Store—7 Essential Steps

#26 Stock Photography and Videos

What is it? 

Whether you’re a trained professional or an amateur photographer/videographer, you can make money selling your photos and videos. Companies buy your photos and videos to use on their marketing materials, website, app, promotional videos, presentations, etc. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

You’ll obviously need to have some photography/videography and editing skills for this to work. But again, you don’t need to be a trained professional. You just need the tools (e.g. a high-quality digital camera), professional editing software, and a way to easily market and sell your work. 

Where you can look for work

Shutterstock
Foap
Alamy
500px
SmugMug Pro
Getty Images
Stocksy
Can Stock Photo
Adobe Stock
Twenty20

Where you can learn more

How to Make Money as a Photographer in 2021

#27 Investing 

What is it? 

By investing, your money can make money for you. Now, this won’t happen overnight. But if you’re patient and make smart decisions, investing is one of the best ways to build significant wealth over time. And if you think investing is only for the rich, you’re wrong

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

These days, you can get started with investing with very little money thanks to discount online brokerages (e.g. Charles Schwab), robo-advisors (e.g. Betterment), and micro-investing apps (e.g. Acorns).

Where you can learn more

2021 Beginner’s Guide To Investing [For College Students And Graduates]

#28 Rent Out Space in Your Home

What is it? 

You’ve likely stayed in an Airbnb apartment before when traveling. So, you don’t need us to tell you that’s an option. But that’s not what we’re talking about here either. 

We’re talking about renting out storage space in your home. Because there are people who need space to store things like their furniture, car, and bicycles but don’t want to deal with expensive storage warehouses. So, if you have the extra space in your garage, basement, etc., you can be just the person they need. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Getting started with this income source is pretty easy. All you need to do is create a free account with a service like Neighbor or StoreAtMyHouse. 

Where you can learn more

How To Earn Money Renting Storage Space in Your Home 

#29 Rent Out Your Car

What is it? 

If there are times when you don’t need your car or have an extra car, you can rent it out to people using services like Turo. According to Turo’s website, the average annual income of someone renting out one car (valued between $25,000 and $34,999) for just seven trips per month is $10,516! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

For this to work, you’ll need a car (obviously), insurance, and an account with Turo or similar services like GetAround or HyreCar.

Where you can learn more

Build a small car sharing business 

#30 Blogging

What is it? 

Think about something you’re interested in. It could be anything. We guarantee there are hundreds of blogs on that exact topic. And some of them are run by bloggers who make good money through ad revenue, affiliate links, and marketing their own products. That could be you! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

To make money as a blogger, the most important skill to have is writing. But you’ll also want to make sure you know how to create engaging content and promote it to your target audience. 

Other digital marketing skills (e.g. SEO) are also important, especially if you’re writing about a popular topic. Lastly, you’ll need to set up, register, and maintain a website or publish on a platform like Medium.

Where you can learn more 

How to Make Money Blogging in 2021 

#31 Create a YouTube Channel

What is it? 

There’s a good chance you already spend hours every week watching videos on YouTube. You likely also have a few influencers that you look to for regular content. Well, with a bit of work and passion, you could be just like them! 

YouTubers make money in a variety of ways. Yes, you can make money from ad revenue once you qualify for the YouTube Partner program. But you can make money in other ways, such as affiliate marketing, selling products, or licensing your videos for the media. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

It’s obvious that you’ll need to know how to create engaging videos to do well on YouTube. But apart from that, you’ll also need to learn at least a bit about marketing (e.g. YouTube SEO) and have the equipment to create quality videos that your audience will enjoy. 

Where you can learn more

How to Make Money on YouTube (Without a Million Subscribers) 

#32 Freelance Graphic Design 

What is it? 

Graphic design is pretty much always in demand. And is, easily, one of the best ways to make an extra $500 a month if you have the skills. 

That’s because businesses will always need things like new logos, designs for packaging, posters, templates, images for advertisements, and more. As a freelance graphic designer, you can help those businesses turn their creative ideas to life. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

You’ll need to have creativity and design skills of course. But you’ll also need to invest in professional design tools like Adobe Creative Cloud, InDesign, and Photoshop. 

You may also need to buy a new laptop or computer to support prolonged use of those tools if your current one doesn’t have enough HP. Lastly, you’ll need to buy and build your own website to market your services or sign up for one of the platforms below. 

Where you can look for work

Upwork
Fiverr 
PeoplePerHour 
99 Designs 

Where you can learn more

10 Ways To Make Money As a Graphic Designer 

#33 Freelance Social Media Manager 

What is it? 

A freelance social media manager does exactly what you think: manage social media accounts for businesses and entrepreneurs. Specifically, you might have to come up with content ideas, write captions, respond to comments, and find ways to increase followers. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)
To get started, you just need to develop a solid understanding of how to create engaging content and build community on one or more social media platforms. 

If those aren’t already skills you’re comfortable using, they can easily be learned by taking an online course. Once you’re ready, you can easily find clients on one of the platforms below. 

Where you can look for work

Upwork
Fiverr 
PeoplePerHour

Where you can learn more

How To Make Money As A Freelance Social Media Manager 

#34 Freelance Web Development 

What is it? 

Freelance web developers help companies build functional and attractive websites. Sometimes this means knowing how to code. But you can even choose to specialize in using platforms like Wix, Squarespace, and WordPress to build websites without any advanced coding knowledge. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

You’ll need to have some experience building websites and, as mentioned, may need to know coding languages. Apart from that, you’ll need to either purchase and manage a website to market your services. You can also create a profile and look for clients on one of the following platforms.  

Where you can look for work

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour

Where you can learn more

The Complete Freelance Web Developer Guide

#35 Freelance Writing

What is it? 

Freelance writers help companies with a variety of marketing materials. For example, as a freelance writer, you can get paid to write blog articles, brochures, website copy, social media captions, ad copy, marketing emails, and so much more. 

And, if you get really good, build a stellar reputation, and have specialized knowledge in a particular field, you can charge premium rates that will allow you to vastly exceed an extra $500 a month! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Being an excellent writer is a good start. But to be successful, it’s also a good idea to spend some time learning about things like copywriting, content marketing, social media marketing, email marketing, UX, SEO, SEM, and sales. 

You don’t necessarily need to become an expert in any of those to make $500 a month. But, if you do, it will help you figure out what type of things you’d enjoy writing, the best way to market your services, and how much you can charge.

To market your services and find clients, you may also need to spend money to build and maintain a professional website. But you could also look for clients on one of the websites below.

Where you can look for work

Upwork
Fiverr 
PeoplePerHour 
ProBlogger 

Where you can learn more

How to become a freelance writer: A guide to a successful freelance career 

#36 Freelance Bookkeeping

What is it? 

Bookkeepers help businesses and organizations keep track of and manage their financial records. As a freelance bookkeeper, you’ll help companies stay organized and ready to make important financial decisions. But don’t worry. You won’t need to advise anyone before they make those decisions. That’s their accountant’s job. 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Some businesses may prefer for you to have a degree in accounting or business. But it’s not required. What’s more important are strong organizational skills and the ability to learn how to use different accounting software like Quickbooks.

Where you can look for work

Upwork
Indeed
FlexJobs
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour 

Where you can learn more
How To Start a Bookkeeping Business in 2021 [Step by Step] 

#37 Freelance Consulting or Coaching

What is it? 

Do you consider yourself to be a specialist in a particular field? If so, you can become a freelance consultant or coach and make good money! Because there are tons of people and businesses that need someone with your specialty skillset to help them grow. 

And, really, your specialty could be anything. Maybe you’re really good at creating engaging content for Instagram or Snapchat. Maybe you’re an expert at winning scholarships for college. Or, perhaps, you’ve mastered something else entirely. The possibilities are endless! 

What you need to get started (skills, money, apps, etc.)

Apart from having specialized knowledge, you may also want to invest in building and maintaining a simple website to attract clients. But you can also build a profile and personal brand on one of the platforms in the next section to look for work. 

Where you can look for work

Upwork
Fiverr
PeoplePerHour

Where you can learn more

How to Do Virtual Consulting and Earn Money 

Final Thoughts 

We hope you now see that there are many ways you can make an extra $500 a month. But remember to do yourself a favor. Don’t try to start all of these ways to make money at once! 

Instead, pick one or two of the methods that stood out to you most. Then, give yourself time to build them up over time. 

Because unless you’re already extremely skilled in one of the freelance jobs we’ve shared, the money won’t happen instantaneously.

But, with patience, you can create a sustainable side hustle that generates extra cash for the long term! Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
You may not believe it at first. But right now — this very moment — is one of the best times to start investing in the stock market, even if you’re still in college. Why? Because the earlier you start investing, the better chance you’ll have at acquiring some serious wealth in the long term!  

But if you’re a complete beginner, the idea of investing can be quite intimidating. And, up until 2020, investing in your future probably seemed like it was only for the rich or those planning for retirement. 

Luckily, it’s not! It can and should be something you start doing ASAP. And we want to help. 

That’s why, in this post, we’re going to share everything you need to know to start investing as a beginner. Specifically, we’ll look at: 

Why investing in your future is important 
Why you don’t need a lot of money to get started 
The most important financial investment jargon you need to know 
5 steps you can take to start investing
7 beginner investment mistakes to avoid 

But before we dive into those topics, we first need to make a few things clear…

A Quick Disclaimer 

We’re not financial advisors. And everything you read here is just to help you learn about the basics of how to invest and share some personal opinions. 

To make smart financial decisions, it’s important you continue to conduct your own research. And, if necessary, seek the advice of a licensed financial advisor who can help you make decisions based on your current financial situation. 

You also need to know that all investments involve some form of risk. And, unfortunately, there’s no guarantee you’ll be successful or avoid losing money when investing. 

In short, when you’ve finished learning the basics here, keep on researching before you get started so you can make smart decisions! 

Sound good? Perfect! Let’s get started by talking about why learning how to start investing is worth your time! 

Why Investing Is Important

If you’re new to investing, it probably makes you feel one of two ways. 

First, it can feel like a level of long-term financial planning that’s too far off for you to be thinking about yet. Most people invest for retirement, right? Yes, but, there are more reasons to invest than that!

And, second, it can feel like a significant risk to put your hard-earned money towards something and not know exactly how much money — if any — you’ll be able to withdraw later. Nerve-wracking? Perhaps… 

But, is learning how to invest still worth it? Absolutely! Why? 

Investing gives you the power to let your money earn more money for you. Yep, you read that right! When you invest, your money can make you money thanks to compound interest. In addition, when you invest you generally protect yourself from your money losing value over time due to inflation.

And, it’s for that reason that investing is said to be the #1 way to build sustainable wealth over time. It also makes it a lot easier for you to pay for major milestones in your life like buying your first home, having the wedding of your dreams, knocking every travel destination off your bucket list, eventually retiring with ease, and so much more.

Wanna know the best part for you? The earlier you start investing, the better! And luckily, these days, you don’t even need that much money to get started. Seriously, the starting amount is likely lower than you think! 

Why You Don’t Need A Lot of Money to Start Investing 

How much money do you think you need to start investing? $10,000? $1,000? $500? Sure, those amounts all work. But you can get started with a lot less — a whole lot less. How much exactly? 

$5-10 a month. Seriously. That’s all you need to get started! 

Sure, if you want to be the next Warren Buffet, you’ll need more. But you can get started with very little thanks to a few no-fee online brokers, robo-advisors, and micro-investing apps. We’ll explain what those are soon. The key thing to know now is that it’s never been easier to invest on a budget! 

With that said, there are some financial goals you should be sure to achieve first. Financial experts recommend that you hold off on investing until you: 

Save up enough money to cover your living expenses for 3-6 months in case of an emergency in which you need to quickly access your money
Pay off any debt that has high-interest rates (e.g. credit cards) because the interest can eat away at your money more than you’d make from your investments  

But, again, once you have those things settled, you won’t need a ton of money to get started investing as a college student! 

Financial Investment Jargon to Know Before You Begin Investing 

As a beginner to investing, one of your biggest hurdles to making smart investment decisions is learning all the financial jargon. Sure, you may have heard about things like stocks and bonds. But do you know what they mean? 

If you’re not confidently shaking your head yes right now, then read on. Here’s a beginner list of a few of the most important investment terms beginners should know. 

Ways to Start Investing 
Discount Online Broker 

A discount online broker is a financial firm’s online platform that lets you invest money in stocks, mutual funds, exchange traded funds, index funds, and bonds. Within the platform, you’ll have all the tools to initiate and manage your investments. Some online brokers charge fees to open your account, but there are a few (that we share later in this post) that are free and great for beginners. With an online brokerage account, you may also have access to the broker’s robo-advisor.

Robo-Adviser 

A robo-advisor is an increasingly popular investment management service that uses algorithms to help you make smart investment decisions. The algorithm works by choosing investments that align with your tolerance for risk, age, income, and financial goals. A robo-advisor will charge you a low percentage for management fees. And, in return, manage your investment portfolio for you.

Micro-Investing Apps

Micro-investing apps use the same type of algorithms as robo-advisors. But their goal is to help you get started investing with very little money. When you create an account with one of these apps, you can link your credit or debit card and have all of your purchases rounded up to the nearest dollar. That extra change is then stored in your account to be invested later. 

For example, let’s say you buy a coffee for $3.48 on your credit card. Your micro-investing app will round the price up to $4 and send $0.52 to your investment account. When your account collects enough spare change from your transactions to reach an amount like $5, the app will automatically invest that money for you . 

401(k)

If you have a job that offers a 401(k) retirement plan, take advantage! It’s one of the easiest ways to get started with investing and make sure you’re planning for the costs of retirement. 

Once you set up your 401(k) account, a small percentage of your paycheck will automatically go into the account to be invested in one or more funds (e.g. mutual funds, index funds) of your choosing. Even better, most employers will match your contribution up to a certain percentage. 

For example, let’s say your monthly salary is $2,800 and you decide to contribute 5% ($140) to your 401(k) per month. If your employer matches that contribution, they’ll also contribute an additional $140 for you to invest. Don’t miss out on this! And if your employer offers to match an even higher percentage, do your best to get the full amount available to you by increasing your contribution. 

If you don’t work for an employer that offers this type of retirement investment plan, consider opening an individual retirement account (IRA). It offers similar benefits without being attached to your employer.

What Are Some of the Most Popular Assets to Invest In?
Stocks

By purchasing a stock, you get to buy a small percentage of a company. Ideally, that business will increase in value over time, making your small portion of it more valuable over time as well. Of course, though, that’s not guaranteed. The company could also decrease in value after your stock purchase — something that happens all the time. 

And finding the right businesses to buy stock in isn’t particularly easy. Still, if you can get it right, investing in stocks is where you’ll make the most money. We share tips on how to do that later in this post as well! 

Mutual Funds

As a beginner investor, mutual funds are typically a good place to start. That’s because, when you buy mutual funds, you contribute to a pool of investor funds that a professional fund manager uses to invest in multiple assets. 

The professional fund managers also take care of all important investment decisions for you at no extra cost. In other words, with mutual funds, you get a balanced investment. And you get that without needing to do as much work or take as much risk as you would if you were purchasing individual stocks. 

Index Funds

Index funds are fairly similar to mutual funds. The main difference between the two lies in the investment strategy. When you buy a mutual fund, you’re essentially investing in the company that manages the fund. You trust that they will use your money to invest it in a way that benefits you down the line.

On the other hand, when you purchase index funds, you’re investing in all of the stocks of a particular market index, such as the S&P 500. The risks and costs of investing in index funds are also relatively low, making them another good option for beginner investors like yourself.  

Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs) 

Exchange-traded funds are another type of mutual fund that functions similarly to index funds. When you buy ETFs, you’re also investing in the stocks of a particular market index. But because ETFs are traded throughout the day, the price you pay per share can change depending on the market. As a beginner, ETFs are also a good option. But they’ll require you to do a bit more research than mutual funds and index funds. 

Target-Date Funds  

A target-date fund is another type of mutual fund that holds a mix of stocks and bonds. When you put your money into a target-date fund, you get to automatically invest with a specific end date in mind (e.g. retirement). As that date nears, your investments will gradually become more conservative to minimize potential risk. This is a great investment option for when you’re thinking of your long-term financial goals. 

Bonds

When you buy a bond, you’re essentially loaning your money to a company or the government. In exchange, at a future date, you’ll get the money you loaned them back along with interest income. You won’t earn too much from buying bonds compared to, say, stocks or index funds. But they’re considered low-risk investments, making them important to have to balance your investment portfolio and minimize risk. 

Certificates of Deposit (CDs)

Certificates of Deposit are almost identical to bonds, except with these you loan your money to a bank or credit union. And, in return, you get back the full amount plus interest after a set amount of time (6 months – 10 years). CDs are also considered low-risk investments that are good to have to keep your investment portfolio balanced. 

How to Start Investing as a Student or Beginner

Alright, now that you have a basic understanding of some important investment jargon, it’s time to actually get started. Follow the steps we’re about to share to start investing as early as today! 

Step 1: Decide Whether to Use a Discount Online Broker, Robo-Adviser, or Micro-Investing App 

For a sustainable approach to investing, you’ve got to choose the method that will work best for you. As a beginner, the easiest route will be for you to start by opening an account with a discount online broker, robo-advisor, or a micro-investing app. 

We’ve already shared what each of those is in the previous section of this guide. But here’s a handy pros and cons chart for each option to help you decide which one makes the most sense for you.  

And here are a few of the top companies beginner investors tend to open accounts with for each of those options: 

Micro-Investing Apps 
Acorns 
Stash 
Discount Online Brokers 
Tornado
Charles Schwab 
Fidelity 
Robo-Advisors 
Betterment 
SoFi
Ellevest 
Step 2: Add Funds to Your Investment Account

This step may seem obvious to you. But it’s worth mentioning just in case, especially if you go with an online broker. Since some accounts have no minimum, your balance will be $0 when you start. 

That means you’ll need to transfer money from your bank account into the investment account. We’d recommend setting up automatic investing so an amount of your choosing gets pulled directly from your bank account every month. 

Step 3: Choose What to Invest In

You know your options: stocks, mutual funds, index funds, ETFs, and bonds. Most robo-advisors and micro-investing apps will offer suggestions on what makes the most sense for your unique profile. But, if you’re taking a more hands-on approach, you’ll need to research what type of investment makes the most sense for you. 

If you’re unsure, your best bet is to start with mutual funds. By nature, mutual funds are great for beginner investors because they allow you to invest in a balanced portfolio of stocks and bonds. And if you want to be safer, remember you can always choose to work with a professional financial advisor. 

Step 4: Set Up a Calendar Reminder to Review Your Accounts  

Once you have automatic investments going, you don’t need to monitor your accounts daily or even weekly. Your money will keep moving and growing on its own!  

But you don’t want to be entirely hands-off either. You need to know how well your investment strategy is working and periodically monitor if there’s room for improvement . So, just set up a reminder now on your calendar to check in on your accounts every so often. Once a month or every other month is just fine when you’re starting out. 

Step 5: Have Patience  

Remember, investing is a long-term strategy to build wealth. If you expect to be making money from investing right away, you’re sure to be disappointed and make rookie mistakes. So, give it time — lots of time! 

As the first American Nobel laureate in economics, Paul Samuelson, once said: “Investing should be more like watching paint dry or watching grass grow. If you want excitement, take $800 and go to Las Vegas.”

7 Beginner Investment Mistakes to Avoid

As a beginner in anything, you’re bound to make some mistakes. This is normal. But here are a few things to look out for so that you make as few beginner investment mistakes as possible! 

Waiting Too Long to Get Started 

It’s never too late to start investing. But the sooner you start, the more time you’ll give your investments to grow. In other words, you increase your potential for earning a lot more if you start now rather than later. 

Just take a look at the difference 10 years can make in the chart below. 

Source

The investment portfolio of the person who started investing at 25 is more than 2x the portfolio value of the person who started at 35! And it’s more than 5x the portfolio value of the person who started at 45!

The key takeaway: take your time to research what you want to invest in and then get started ASAP. 

Investing Money You Need in the Short Term 

Remember: there is no guarantee that you’ll make money right away with investing. You’ve got to stick it out of the long-haul if you want to see any significant value. In fact, in the short term, you could even lose money if the market drops. So, don’t invest any money that you’ll need anytime soon. 

For money that you might need soon, you’re better off putting it into a high-interest savings account. In that type of savings account, you’ll still be able to collect some interest – albeit a small amount – while still having the assurance that it will be there when you need it. 

Not Doing Research Before Purchasing Stocks 

You’ve probably heard at least some news about the stock prices for companies like Amazon, Apple, and Tesla. But does that mean these and other companies you know and like are the companies you should invest in when buying stocks? Not exactly — especially since the cost of stocks in those companies might be out of your price range as a beginner investor. 

So, how do you pick the best stock? Well, the short answer is this: research! Of course, it’s not that simple. For a more in-depth explanation, check out this video from the Motley Fool, a popular private financial and investing advice company, that shows you how to learn the value of a stock before you invest: 

And remember, you can always make things easier on yourself by getting help from a professional financial advisor or choosing to start with a robo-advisor or micro-investing app. 

Failing to Diversify Your Investment Portfolio 

Don’t make the mistake of only investing in just one company. Why? Because you know what happens if that company suddenly tanks? You lose everything. Not ideal! 

Instead, what you want to do is make sure you’re diversifying your investment portfolio. You can do this gradually over time. But the idea is that you spread out your investments among different assets (stocks, mutual funds, ETFs, bonds, etc.) as well as different economic sectors and geographical regions.  

By diversifying, you reduce risk and ensure that if one investment turns sour, you still have others to keep your overall investment portfolio stable. 

Withdrawing Your Investments When The Market Drops  

By now, you hopefully know that your investments will take time to grow. You should also know that there will be moments when the market drops and it will look like you’re about to lose money. Don’t forget those two points. Because one of the biggest mistakes for new investors is pulling out all their money when things look bad. 

Why should you avoid this? Because the market will most likely rebound. And guess what? It will drop again in the future and then rebound again. That’s the way it works. So, keep calm and just let your money sit there, even when things look bad for a while. 

Waiting to Invest Until You’ve Paid Off Student Loans

Earlier in this post, we said you should wait until you’ve paid off high-interest debt before you begin investing. So, why are we now saying it could be a mistake to wait until you’ve paid off your student loans? 

Well, because not all student loan debt is high-interest debt, particularly federal student loans which tend to have low interest rates. Yes, you’ll still want to continue to make regular payments.

But instead of aggressively paying them off as quickly as possible, it could be a better financial decision to put a bit of that cash in an investment account. Because there your money has a chance to grow exponentially, over time, thanks to compound interest.

Of course, if you want to prioritize paying off your student loans first, that’s not a bad idea either. Just know it’s not an absolute requirement to begin investing.  

Forgetting to Simultaneously Invest In Yourself

As a beginner investor, you may find yourself wanting to put all of your time and energy into building a strong portfolio. But as Warren Buffet, one of the world’s most successful investors, once said: “Ultimately, there’s one investment that supersedes all others: Invest in yourself.”

What are some ways you can invest in yourself? Well, for one, your education! By learning new things, in and out of school, you gain the power to enrich your life in a multitude of ways. Plus, it can give you more earning power and the opportunity to enhance your financial literacy.

It’s also a good idea to invest overall in your health, general well-being, and happiness. Because without any of those things, how would you even enjoy any of the money you make from investing? 

Final Thoughts

There’s a lot to learn if you want to become a pro-investor. Luckily, you don’t have to know everything to get started! You can get started right now, even if you’re a college student with relatively little money to spare! We hope the information we’ve shared here helps you do just that. 

And if you’re looking for more student-focused financial tips, we’ve also got you covered. Check out the rest of our blog where we go in-depth on how to do things like pick the best student loans, graduate debt free, and win a range of amazing scholarships!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’re a student looking to reduce the cost of your education and set yourself up for success after graduating, the Hispanic Scholarship Fund (HSF) is an amazing resource. Not only does the HSF offer their scholars a wide range of support services to succeed in higher education — they also have some pretty generous scholarships! 

That’s why, in this post, we’re going to share all the information you need to put together a winning application for the Hispanic Scholarship Fund.

Here’s what will cover: 

How much scholarship money you can win as an HSF Scholar 
The Hispanic Scholarship Fund eligibility requirements 
How to apply for the Hispanic Scholarship Fund 
The HSF application timeline 
6 tips to improve your chances of winning an HSF scholarship 

Let’s jump right in!

What Is the Hispanic Scholarship Fund? 

The Hispanic Scholarship Fund is a nonprofit organization that aims to empower Hispanic and Latino students with the knowledge and resources to excel in higher education. 

Every year, the HSF selects around 10,000 students to become HSF Scholars. If you’re selected as an HSF scholar, you gain access to a wide range of amazing services, including internship and job opportunities with the HSF’s corporate partners, mentorship opportunities, leadership development programs and conferences, wellness programs, and exclusive scholarship opportunities. 

HSF Scholarship Opportunities 

Annually, the HSF awards HSF Scholars more than $30 million in merit-based scholarships – ranging from $500-$5,000 per student! These scholarships can be used to pay for tuition, fees, books, and other academic-related supplies, room/board and transportation expenses related to school.

But, it’s important you know up front that not all HSF Scholars receive scholarships. That’s why later in this post we’ll give you some tips on how to boost your chances of winning! This is, of course, assuming you’re eligible to apply. Let’s check now to see if you are! 

Hispanic Scholarship Fund Eligibility Requirements 

The Hispanic Scholarship Fund can be an option for you at nearly every stage of your education, including when you’re a:

Graduating high school senior
Undergraduate student (all years)
Community college student transferring to a four-year university
Graduate student (law school, medical school, MBA, and all other full-time masters or PhD programs)

But to become an HSF Scholar and be eligible for scholarships, you must also:


Be of Hispanic heritage
Be a U.S. citizen, permanent legal resident, or DACA 
Have a minimum of 3.0 GPA on a 4.0 scale (or equivalent) for high school students; minimum of 2.5 GPA on a 4.0 scale (or equivalent) for college and graduate students
Plan to enroll full-time in an accredited, public or not-for-profit, four-year university, or graduate school, in the US, for the upcoming academic year
Submit the FAFSA or state-based financial aid forms (if applicable)
How to Apply for the Hispanic Scholarship Fund

Applying for the Hispanic Scholarship Fund will require you to gather several documents to complete your online application. Luckily, it’s nothing too complicated! 

Here’s everything you’ll need: 

Your most recent high school or college transcript. You may be able to request these online. If not, you’ll need to speak with your high school guidance counselor or college registrar. 

A completed FAFSA. If you’ve never done this, check out our guide on how to apply for FAFSA! 

A copy of your Student Aid Report (SAR). You’ll get this after submitting your FAFSA.

Financial aid award letter from the college/university you will be attending. You’ll get this from your college/university’s financial aid department. 

A picture. You’ll need to submit a professional headshot or student photo.

Enrollment verification from your college/university. You’ll need to request this from your school’s admissions office. Or, if you’re not yet enrolled, you can wait to send it the summer after you have received your HSF award notification.

A personal essay. You’ll be asked to write an essay about your goals, strengths, education values, and why you’re applying for the Hispanic Scholarship Fund.

At least one academic recommendation letter. This letter will need to come from a teacher, academic advisor/guidance counselor, or some other person who has influenced your academic development. You can also include additional recommendation letters, including from someone who knows you outside of an academic environment (e.g. sports coach, your boss at work).

Employment Authorization Document (EAD). This requirement only applies to you if you’re a DACA recipient.

Hispanic Scholarship Fund Application Timeline 

So, by now you may be wondering: when is the application for the Hispanic Scholarship Fund open and when is it due? Well, we’ve got you covered! Here’s the official HSF scholarship timeline: 

January 1: The Hispanic Scholarship Fund application opens. 

February: The application is due. 

March – April: Finalists for the HSF are announced and asked to submit recommendations, transcripts, the SAR, and the personal essay.

May – June: The HSF evaluates applications and selects Scholars who will then be notified if they have received a scholarship (funded) or if they were waitlisted for an award (waitlisted). All HSF Scholars will gain access to HSF support services as long as they submit the remaining required documents. 

June – September: All HSF Scholars must submit their financial aid award letter.  

October – November: All HSF Scholars must submit their enrollment verification form. 

October – December: The HSF Scholarships are awarded to a select number of HSF Scholars.   

6 Tips to Improve Your Chances of Winning a Scholarship from the HSF 

Unsurprisingly, the Hispanic Scholarship Fund receives thousands of applications from qualified students every year – but not all will be chosen as HSF Scholars. And even fewer will be given scholarships. So, here are a few tips to boost your chances!  

Start Your HSF Application As Soon As Possible

By starting the HSF application ASAP, you lower the risk of missing any important documents, deadlines, or instructions. It also gives you time to follow up with the people who need to submit things like your transcripts, financial aid award letter, recommendation letters, etc.

Starting early also means you’ll have time to pass your materials to a teacher, parent, or guidance counselor to review and make sure your application is as close to perfect as can be! 

Submit the FAFSA Early 

Students who submit the FAFSA early tend to get better financial aid packages. But, given how much information you need to complete it, it’s also easy to put off until the last minute. Try not to do that! 

Remember, you’ll need to have submitted FAFSA and your Student Aid Report to complete the HSF application. You don’t want your application to be incomplete because you waited too long to start the FAFSA! If it’s your first time completing the FAFSA or need a quick refresh of what you need to do, take a look at this guide on how to apply for FAFSA.

Strive for a Strong Academic Record 

The minimum GPA to apply for the Hispanic Scholarship Fund is a cumulative 3.0 based on a 4.0 scale for high school students and a cumulative GPA of 2.5 on a 4.0 scale for college/graduate students. But, remember, these scholarships are competitive! 

If you still have time to improve your GPA before applying, do your best to make that happen! Seek extra help from your teachers, use free resources like Khan Academy to get ahead, and take honors/advanced level classes to help demonstrate your academic strengths. 

Write a Remarkable Personal Essay 

Scholarship essays play a pretty significant part in many scholarship competitions. Why? Because they’re the only time the scholarship selection committee gets to hear your voice and learn about what makes you unique. So, be sure you’re not writing a generic, boring essay that could easily be written by any of your peers. 

The best scholarship essays tell a story that shows you are connected to the mission of the scholarship foundation and, consequently, the ideal person to award the scholarship. If you’re not sure how to write an essay like this, be sure to check out our guides on how to write a scholarship essay and how to write a personal statement.  

Seek Out Leadership Opportunities

Good grades aren’t all scholarship foundations want to see from applicants. They also want to award students who show initiative in areas they’re passionate about! That’s why, if you have time before applying, striving for leadership in your extracurriculars, volunteer work, and/or job is one of the best things you can do.

While there isn’t a section of the HSF application specifically dedicated to leadership, there are ways to showcase it in your application. For example, your leadership experience could be a great thing to mention in your personal essay and could also show up in your recommendation letter. 

Make Sure You Get a Stellar Recommendation Letter

Similar to the personal essay, recommendation letters give scholarship foundations, like the HSF, the opportunity to get a more objective perspective of you and your academic potential. Typically, what gets written about you in the letter is out of your control. But there are some things you can do to get the best letter possible. 

First, make sure you’re following the HSF guidelines by getting someone who knows you in an academic setting. Then, make sure that person knows what things to highlight about you in the letter by sharing with them why you’re applying for HSF, your academic goals, your resume with work and extracurricular experience, and a copy of your personal essay.

You can also ask your recommender to read our guide on how to write a scholarship letter of recommendation where we share all the information they’ll need! 

Where to Find More Scholarships 

The Hispanic Scholarship Fund is one of the best support resources for Hispanic and Latino students pursuing higher education. If that’s you, we hope the information we shared here helps you prepare an outstanding application! 

We also hope you know there are many more scholarships you can apply for and win! To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how to graduate debt free, understand your options for college financial aid, find online jobs to make some extra money, and win scholarships like the Fulbright Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’ve never had a job that offers tuition reimbursement, it might sound too good to be true. There are jobs that pay you to go to school… on top of your salary??? Well, believe it! 

Because when you work for a company with a tuition reimbursement or tuition assistance program, you can enjoy some serious savings — at some companies you can even get up to 100% of tuition covered!

In the post, we’re going to look at 50 companies that can help you pay for tuition as well as cover questions and topics like: 

What is a tuition reimbursement program? 
How does tuition reimbursement benefit the employer?
How to find even more money to pay for school  

Let’s jump right in! 

What Is Tuition Reimbursement?

Tuition reimbursement is an employee benefit. Companies that offer tuition reimbursement typically agree to pay a set amount or percentage of your tuition and other education expenses for a degree or study program. 

Typically, your employer will require you to pay for everything on your own first. But once you complete the course, semester, etc. you can submit a form to your company to get reimbursed in a future paycheck. 

Sounds awesome, right? It definitely can be. But before you sign up for courses, you’ll need to make sure the course or degree program you choose meets the company’s requirements for tuition reimbursement. 

For example, some companies will only reimburse you for courses or degree programs if they are relevant to your line of work. Why? Because it creates a win-win situation for both you and the company. You get to gain new skills and the company gains a more knowledgeable employee.

Of course, some companies will help you pay for school no matter what you choose to study. Because there are more ways than one that these programs benefit employers. 

How Does Tuition Reimbursement Benefit the Employer? 

In the long run, tuition reimbursement programs benefit the companies who offer them just as much as the employees. 

For example, several studies have found that education assistance and tuition reimbursement programs help companies: 

Recruit talented employees who recognize the value of lifelong learning 
Keep those talented employees longer and, therefore, save time and money that might otherwise be spent on hiring 
Make sure their employees continue to progress in their career by staying on top of the latest trends and developments in their field  
Earn tax-saving benefits 
50 Companies That Offer Tuition Reimbursement Programs

Without further ado, let’s look at the 50 companies that offer amazing tuition reimbursement programs for college, graduate school, continuing education programs, and more! For more information on each program, click the name of the company. 

Amazon 

Amazon’s Career Choice program pays up 95% of tuition and fees (up to a yearly maximum) for courses that lead to a certificate or diploma in relevant fields of study. For example, you can study IT, healthcare, transportation, and mechanical trades. Your courses would be eligible even when your new skills could prepare you for a job outside of Amazon. 

Anthem, Inc

Full-time and part-time associates at Anthem can get tuition for qualifying degree programs reimbursed for up to $5,000 per year through the company’s Education Assistance Program. Anthem also has a partnership with Western Governors University that gives employees hoping to pursue a master’s degree a discount on tuition and exclusive scholarship opportunities.

Apple 

To help full-time employees advance their careers, Apple’s Education Reimbursement program offers up to $5,250 per year for education expenses, such as tuition. As an employee, you can also take advantage of Apple University, an initiative that aims to help employees think like Steve Jobs. As a student of Apple University, you’d gain access to classes, seminars, and tools on Apple’s company culture, personal finance, software skills, and business skills. 

Best Buy 

Best Buy reimburses full-time employees up to $3,500 a year for undergraduate tuition expenses and up to $5,250 a year for graduate-level coursework.

Bank of America 

Bank of America’s Tuition Assistance & Academic Support Program reimburses employees up to $7,500 per year for eligible tuition-related expenses for job-related courses and certifications. On top of that, the program also offers free personalized guidance for meeting your career and education goals. 

Blue Shield of California 

For both full-time and part-time employees, Blue Shield of California tuition assistance program offers tuition reimbursement for eligible tuition expenses. Per year, full-time employees can get up to $5,250 reimbursed, while part-time employees can get up to $2,625. 

BP

To encourage professional development, BP’s education assistance program reimburses up to 90% of the eligible expenses for educational and vocational courses (related to your job at BP) that are taken at an approved educational institution.

Carmax

Carmax’s tuition assistance program offers up to $5,250 a year for full-time associates and up to $2,500 a year for part-time associates for education expenses. Eligible courses for tuition reimbursement include courses for GED, ESL, literacy-related courses, and credit-bearing courses that will be applied to a degree-seeking program (e.g. bachelor’s degree). 

Chick-Fil-A

Chick-Fil-A offers its employees tuition discounts to more than 100 colleges and universities through a partnership with Scholarship America. Check out this list of colleges and universities that offer discounts and scholarships of various amounts.

Chipotle 

Chipotle’s generous tuition reimbursement plan covers 100% of tuition covered for select degrees, high school diplomas, and college preparation courses. They also offer to reimburse up to $5,250 a year for a wider selection of programs and courses.

Comcast 

Comcast has a partnership with the University of Arizona Global Campus to offer up to 20% savings on tuition for 50+ associate, bachelor’s, and master’s degree programs. To be eligible, you must be a full-time employee with six months or more of employment.

Deloitte 

Deloitte’s Graduate School Assistance Program reimburses full tuition for employees pursuing graduate school degrees. The program also gives participants a stipend for technology and discounts for graduate school entrance exam preparation classes (e.g. GMAT). To receive the reimbursement, you must agree to work for Deloitte for at least two years following graduate school. 

Disney

By working at Disney, full-time and part-time employees can get 100% of tuition paid upfront at Disney Aspire network schools for a wide range of courses to build skills and pursue degrees at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The courses don’t need to be related to your job at Disney. 

FedEx

FedEx’s tuition assistance program reimburses up to $1,500 a year for eligible expenses on education programs that can enhance your career advancement opportunities in FedEx.

Ford Motors 

Ford’s Salaried Tuition Assistance Program provides financial assistance of up to $6,000 a year for eligible programs and courses related to your job at Ford. The program also provides additional funding for students pursuing an MBA. 

Gap, Inc

For employees looking to develop skills related to their job, Gap’s Tuition Reimbursement Program covers up to 100% of tuition for up to two classes per term, 100% of up to two books per term, and approved fees. In total, the program will reimburse up to $5,000 a year.

GEICO

Full-time associates at Geico can get reimbursed up to $5,250 a year for undergraduate application fees, tuition, course-related charges and applicable textbook costs.

Genentech 

Genentech employees who attend accredited colleges and universities to gain skills and knowledge for company-related jobs can be reimbursed up to $10,000 a year. 

Home Depot 

Through Home Depot’s Tuition Reimbursement Program, employees pursuing an associate’s, bachelor’s, master’s, doctoral, or technical degree can be reimbursed up to 50% of the cost of tuition, books and reasonable class registration fees and 50% of mandatory fees. Salaried associates can get reimbursed up to $5,000 a year, full-time associates up to $3,000 a year, and part-time associates up to $1,500 a year. 

Intuit

Intuit offers tuition reimbursement for both full-time and part-time employees who seek to take courses related to careers at the company. Full-time employees can get reimbursed up to $5,000 a year for tuition and tuition-related expenses (e.g. application fees, required books, required software and lab fees). Part-time employees can get reimbursed up to $2,500 a year. 

Kaiser Permanente 

For employees who work at least 20 hours a week, Kaiser Permanente offers tuition reimbursement of up to $3,000 a year for continuing education courses, certificate programs, or degree programs.

KFC

KFC’s REACH Educational Grant Program helps employees pursue any degree at an accredited four-year or two-year college, trade/vocational school, or graduate school. KFC Restaurant General Managers, Assistant Managers, Shift Supervisors and Team Members can apply. Managers can receive a grant worth $3,000, previous REACH Grant recipients receive $2,500, and first-time winners receive $2,000. Employees can reapply for the grant each year.

Marco’s Pizza 

Marco’s Pizza has partnered with Bellevue University to offer tuition assistance for full-time and part-time employees. For any of Bellevue University’s degree programs, you can get reimbursed for up to $5,250 a year. 

McDonald’s 

With McDonald’s Archways to Opportunities program, eligible employees can get tuition reimbursed for approved courses at an accredited four-year or two-year college, trade/vocational school, or graduate school. To be eligible, you must work at a McDonald’s location where the franchise owner/operator participates in the program. Full-time restaurant managers, working at least 30 hours per week and in good standing, can get $3,000 of tuition reimbursed each year. Restaurant crew, part-time managers or part-time office staff, working at least 15 hours per week and in good standing, can get $2,500 each year. 

Novaritis 

Novartis offers its employees up to 100% tuition reimbursement up to an annual maximum on eligible expenses for courses related to jobs at Novartis.

Oracle 

Oracle reimburses up to $5,250 a year for employees who take approved programs of study.

Papa John’s 

Through Papa John’s Dough & Degrees program, employees at corporate-owned locations can get 100% of tuition paid for undergraduate and graduate online degree programs through Purdue University Global. For employees at franchise locations, the program offers reduced tuition. 

Pizza Hut

Pizza Hut has a partnership with Excelsior College to offer employees up to 51% in savings on tuition costs. The discounts can be applied to associate’s, bachelor’s or master’s degree programs – including an MBA – or professional certification programs.

Publix

Publix’s tuition reimbursement program covers expenses for individual courses (e.g. ESL) and technical programs related to an employee’s job and undergraduate programs in business-related fields (e.g. accounting, information technology, marketing, etc.). To be eligible, you must be an employee for at least 6 months working an average of 10 hours a week. For college and university enrollment, you can get reimbursed up to $3,200 a year (for a maximum of $12,800). For all other courses of study, you can get reimbursed up to $1,700 a year (for a maximum of $3,400).

Raytheon Missiles & Defense

Raytheon Missiles & Defense educational assistance program reimburses employees up to $10,000 a year for approved courses and accredited certificate and degree programs relevant to their job. 

Starbucks

Starbucks covers 100% of tuition for eligible part-time and full-time employees who want to pursue a first-time bachelor’s degree through Arizona State University’s online program. Participants can choose from over 100 undergraduate degree programs.

Taco Bell 

For employees pursuing college degrees, professional certificates, high school completion, and Master’s degrees, Taco Bell offers tuition reimbursement up to $5,250 a year. 

T-Mobile

After 90 days of employment at T-Mobile, employees are eligible for tuition reimbursement on approved courses related to roles within the company. Full-time employees can get reimbursed up to $5,250 a year, while part-time employees can get up to $2,500 a year. T-Mobile has also partnered with Ashford University, Capella University, Colorado Technical University, Kaplan and the University of Phoenix to offer full tuition coverage for online degrees.

UPS 

Through the UPS Earn & Learn Program, part-time employees can receive up to $5,250 a year (at a lifetime maximum of $25,000) in tuition reimbursement for any course of study at more than 100 colleges nationwide. 

Verizon 

Verizon has a partnership with Bellevue University to offer full-time employees up to $13,250 a year and part-time employees up to $8,000 a year in tuition assistance. 

Wells Fargo 

Regular and part-time employees at Wells Fargo can get reimbursed for eligible tuition expenses up to $5,000 a year.

Walmart

Walmart associates can work toward a professional certificate, skilled trades career diploma, or a college degree (bachelor’s and associate’s) in business, supply chain, technology, and health for $1 a day! Additionally, employees that are high school students can get free ACT and SAT prep and up to seven hours of free college credit through Walmart’s Live Better U’s College Start program.

More companies with tuition reimbursement programs 

The following list of companies also report having tuition reimbursement programs as one of their employee benefits. We’re listing them here because there’s no official information stating exactly how much money you can get reimbursed.

AT&T
Boeing 
Capital One
Chevron
CVS
Fandango
Lowe’s
Smuckers 
Target 
Ticketmaster 
White Castle
Wayfair
Whirlpool
Where to Find More Money to Pay for School 

If you plan to work while in school, finding a job with a tuition reimbursement program is a great way to cut down your tuition costs and make money at the same time. By pairing it with financial aid and scholarships, these programs might even make it possible for you to go to college for free! 

If you qualify for financial aid, make sure you fill out the FAFSA as soon as it opens. And for scholarships, apply to as many as you qualify for. There are many! To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits!

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on things like how to write winning scholarship essays, get the best student loan, and win scholarships like the ROTC Scholarships and National Merit Scholarship. 

Good luck! 

 

 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
There are a lot of benefits to joining an ROTC program while in college. For one, you get to join a community of other students committed to learning what it takes to serve and protect their country. And, on top of that, you’d qualify for ROTC scholarships, which are some of the most generous in the nation!

But you aren’t guaranteed a scholarship just because you plan to join ROTC. You need to apply for the scholarship and ROTC program best suited for your goals. You also need to make sure you submit a top-notch application! 

That’s why, in this blog post, we’re going to show you how to get an ROTC scholarship by covering: 

The different types of ROTC scholarships offered by the U.S. Army, Air Force, and Navy
The ROTC scholarship eligibility requirements 
The application timelines for each of the ROTC scholarships 
How to submit your ROTC scholarship application 
3 tips to increase your chances of winning an ROTC scholarship 

But before we dive into those topics, let’s first go over some general information about ROTC programs! 

What is ROTC?

So, maybe you’ve heard of ROTC before. But if you’re still not entirely sure what it is? No worries! Let’s do a quick overview. 

ROTC stands for Reserve Officers’ Training Corps. Essentially, it’s a training program for students who want to serve in one of the branches of the U.S. military after graduating from college. 

The Army, Navy and Air Force each have their own program that you can sign up for at one of 1,700+ colleges. You can find a list of the colleges that offer each ROTC program by clicking one of the links below:

Army ROTC Colleges 
Navy ROTC Colleges 
Air Force ROTC Colleges 
What Do You Learn in ROTC? 

In ROTC, you can expect to learn the basics of what it takes to become an officer or cadet in your chosen branch of the military. For example, in the video below, you’ll see that the Army ROTC involves basic soldiering drills, physical fitness training, and leadership development.    

Overall, the training you receive during ROTC prepares you to fast track your progression in the military after graduating from college. 

What Is an ROTC Scholarship? 

The Army, Navy and Air Force ROTC programs offer thousands of college scholarships – including some full-ride scholarships – for both high school students about to enter college and current college students.

But not all of the ROTC scholarships provide the same benefits and amount of money to help you pay for school. So, let’s look now at the different ROTC scholarship amounts!  

Army ROTC Scholarships

As a recipient of any of the following Army ROTC Scholarships, you’d receive an award that covers full tuition, fees, books, and a monthly stipend.

4-Year College Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re currently a high-school student who will soon graduate and plan to attend a four-year college program. 

3-Year College Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re a current college student with three more years of study before completing your degree.

2-Year College Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re a current college student with two more years of study before completing your degree.

Navy / Marine Corps ROTC Scholarships

As a recipient of any of the following Navy / Marine Corps ROTC Scholarships, you’d receive an award that covers full tuition, books, fees, and a monthly stipend.

4-Year Navy Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re currently a high-school student who will soon graduate, plan to attend a four-year college program, and have an interest in joining the Navy. 

4-Year Marine Corps Option Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re currently a high-school student who will soon graduate, plan to attend a four-year college program, and have an interest in joining the Marines.

4-Year Navy-Nurse Option Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re currently a high-school student who will soon graduate, plan to attend a four-year college program to pursue a nursing degree (BSN), and have an interest in joining the Navy.

2 & 3 Year Navy ROTC Scholarships 

If you’re already in college, there’s also the option to apply for similar 2-3 year scholarships for the Navy, Marine Corps, and Navy-Nurse ROTC programs as long as you meet the following requirements:

Must have at least 30 semester hours (45 quarter hours) but no more than 120 semester hours (180 quarter hours)
Must have a minimum college GPA of 2.5 (on a 4.0 scale)
Must be admitted to or in the process of gaining admittance to a school affiliated with the Navy ROTC Unit from which you are being nominated
Air Force ROTC Scholarships

The various Air Force ROTC Scholarships are worth different amounts, depending on when and what type of scholarship you apply for. There are scholarships for high school students, college students, and enlisted cadets. 

Air Force ROTC Scholarships for High School Students 

You can apply for one of the following AFROTC scholarships if you’re currently a high-school student who will soon graduate and plan to attend a four-year college program.

Type 1 Scholarship

As a recipient of this scholarship, you’d receive an award that covers full tuition and authorized fees at any public or private college/university with an Air Force ROTC detachment. You’d also receive a monthly stipend, ranging from $300-500, for living expenses and an annual stipend of $900 for textbooks.

Type 2 Scholarship

As a recipient of this scholarship, you’d receive an award that pays up to $18,000 per year in college tuition and authorized fees at any public or private college/university with an Air Force ROTC detachment. You’d also receive a monthly stipend, ranging from $300-500, for living expenses and an annual stipend of $900 for textbooks.

Type 7 Scholarship

As a recipient of this scholarship, you’d receive an award that covers full tuition and authorized fees at any public in-state college/university with an Air Force ROTC detachment. You’d also receive a monthly stipend, ranging from $300-500, for living expenses and an annual stipend of $900 for textbooks.

With a Type 7 scholarship, you’d also have the option to convert your scholarship to a three-year Type 2 scholarship that can be used at out-of-state or private colleges/universities.  

Air Force ROTC Scholarships for Current College Students

You can apply for one of the following Air Force ROTC scholarships if you’re a current college student.

Type 1 Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re a cadet pursuing a degree in a technical major, such as Chemistry or Mechanical Engineering. 

As a recipient of this scholarship, you’d receive an award that covers full tuition and authorized fees at any public in-state college/university with an Air Force ROTC detachment. You’d also receive a monthly stipend, ranging from $300-500, for living expenses and an annual stipend of $900 for textbooks.

Type 2 Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re a college freshman or sophomore enrolled in your college’s Air Force ROTC In-College Scholarship Program.

As a recipient of this scholarship, you’d receive an award that pays up to $18,000 per year in college tuition and authorized fees at any public or private college/university with an Air Force ROTC detachment. You’d also receive a monthly stipend, ranging from $300-500, for living expenses and an annual stipend of $900 for textbooks.

Nursing Scholarship

You can apply for this scholarship if you’re an undergraduate sophomore or junior at a nursing program at a college or university accredited by the National League for Nursing Accreditation Commission (NLNAC) or Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE).

The award amount for the Nursing Scholarship is the same as the Type 1 and Type 2 scholarships, depending on when you apply for the scholarship.

Air Force ROTC Scholarships for Enlisted Cadets 

You can apply for one of the following Air Force ROTC scholarships if you’re already an enlisted Air Force personnel that would like to return to school full-time.

Airman Scholarship & Commissioning Program (ASCP) and Scholarship for Outstanding Airmen to ROTC (SOAR)

As a recipient of either one of these scholarships, you can receive an award that pays up to $18,000 per academic year. You’d also receive a monthly stipend, ranging from $300-500, for living expenses and an annual stipend of $900 for textbooks. Upon graduation and completion of the program, you would commission as a second lieutenant in the U.S. Air Force.

ROTC Scholarship Eligibility Requirements 

How do you qualify for an ROTC scholarship? Well, as you may have already noticed, that, too, depends on which branch of the military you plan to join and which of the scholarships you hope to win. 

But below you’ll find the general eligibility requirements for high school students hoping to enter each ROTC program. We’ll also share a bit of information about the military service requirement following your college graduation. 

Army ROTC Scholarship Eligibility Requirements 

To apply for an Army ROTC scholarship as a high school student, you must: 

Be a US citizen between the ages of 17 and 26
Have at least a cumulative high school GPA of at least 2.5
Have a high school diploma or equivalent 
Score at least a 1000 on the SAT or 19 on the ACT
Meet physical standards by passing the Army Fitness Test 
Army ROTC Service Commitment 

When you accept an Army ROTC Scholarship, you must also agree to: 

An eight-year service commitment with the Army
Serve full time in the Army for four years and four years with the Individual Ready Reserve (IRR).
Selected Cadets may choose to serve part time in the Army Reserve or Army National Guard while pursuing a civilian career
Navy ROTC Scholarship Eligibility Requirements 

To apply for a Navy ROTC Scholarship as a high school student, you must: 

Be a U.S. citizen, a naturalized U.S. citizen or in the process of becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen
Be between the ages 17-23 by September 1 of the year starting college
Graduate from high school or gain an equivalent certificate by August 1 of the year of entrance into the four-year Navy ROTC Scholarship program
Navy and Nurse Application Test Scores: SAT: 540 Math; 550 Evidence Based Reading and Writing AND 1100 Combined (Math plus Evidence Based Reading and Writing) OR ACT: 21 Math; 22 English AND 44 Combined (Math plus English) OR a cumulative High school GPA of 2.75 (on a 4.0 Scale) AND a 2.0 grade (on a 4.0 Scale) in Algebra II (or equivalent course) AND a statement from your high school guidance counselor or senior JROTC instructor certifying that SAT and ACT testing was not reasonably available to you
Marine Application Test Scores: SAT minimum combined score of 1000 on the Math and Evidence Based Reading and Writing portions of the test OR ACT minimum composite score of 22
Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) minimum score of 74
Navy ROTC Service Commitment 
As a graduate of the Navy ROTC program, you’d be required to serve a minimum of five years of active military service. Additional requirements may be required for specific job assignments.
As a graduate of the Marine Corps Option, you’d be required to serve at least four years on active duty.
As a graduate of the Navy Nurse Corps Option, you’d be required to serve at least four years on active duty.
Air Force ROTC Scholarship Eligibility Requirements 

To apply for an Air Force ROTC scholarship, you must: 

Be a United States citizen or obtain U.S. citizenship by the last day of the first term of your freshman year (for four-year offers) or the first term of sophomore year (for three-year offers)
Pass a Department of Defense Medical Examination Review Board (DODMERB) medical exam
Complete the Physical Fitness Assessment, which consists of three events: push-ups, sit-ups, and a 1.5-mile run.
If offered a scholarship, you must pass a Physical Fitness Test before the end of your first semester of college (for high school applicants)
Achieve a SAT composite score of 1240 or ACT composite score of 26 (for high school applicants)
Have a cumulative unweighted GPA of 3.0 or higher (for high school applicants; for college applicants, your school’s Air Force ROTC Commander determines the minimum GPA)
Air Force ROTC Service Commitment 

When you accept an AFROTC scholarship, you must also agree to: 

Complete a 13-day summer field training course at Maxwell AFB, Alabama, between your sophomore and junior years
Complete Air Force ROTC General Military Course (GMC) your freshman and sophomore years and the Professional Officer Course (POC) your junior and senior years
Accept a commission as an Air Force officer and serve at least four years on active duty
How to Apply for an ROTC Scholarship

Ready to get started on your application for one the ROTC Scholarships? Here’s a general list of the materials you’ll need for each application! 

Army ROTC Scholarships

Your application for an Army ROTC Scholarship will include: 

A complete online application
Your high school transcripts
SAT or ACT scores
Results from the ROTC Basic Fitness Test

You’ll also need to attend an interview with an Army ROTC program at one of your choice colleges. 

Navy ROTC Scholarships

Your application for a Navy ROTC Scholarship will include: 

A complete online application 
SAT or ACT scores
Volunteer and work history 
List of extracurricular activities and noteworthy accomplishments 
Your college choices and planned major 
Several short scholarship application essays 
Three references: 1) a guidance counselor/school administrator; 2) a math, science, or English teacher (depending on program option), and 3) another teacher, counselor, coach, or employer
Air Force ROTC Scholarships

Your application for an Air Force ROTC Scholarship will include: 

A complete online application
Your high school transcripts
SAT or ACT scores
A form completed and signed by your high school counselor (here’s a link to an old version of the form for reference!)
Results from the Physical Fitness Assessment 
ROTC Scholarship Application Timelines 

You’ll likely need some time to get together all of the application materials we just mentioned. So, let’s now take a look at when the scholarship application cycles typically start and end for each of the ROTC programs.

Army ROTC Scholarships

Application Opens: June 2021* 

Application Deadline: February 2022*

*These dates are estimates based on the last application cycle. The official application open date and deadline for Army ROTC scholarships have not been announced yet. 

Navy / Marine Corps ROTC Scholarships

Application Opens: April 1, 2021 

Application Deadline: January 31, 2022

Air Force ROTC Scholarships

Application Opens: July 1, 2021 

Application Deadline:  December 31, 2021

3 Tips to Increase Your Chances of Winning an ROTC Scholarship  

Submitting a complete application for one of the ROTC scholarships is one thing. But submitting a competitive application is another! Here are a few tips to give you a competitive advantage.

Express Interest As Early As Possible 

The ROTC programs want to award students who are serious about their commitment to serve their country. So, once you’re sure the military is the right career path for you, make that commitment as clear as possible.

One of the best ways to do that is to express your interest early. You can do that by contacting an ROTC advisor at the college you plan to attend, visiting a recruitment office, or, if you’re still in high school, joining Junior ROTC (JROTC). 

Apply for a Major that’s Highly Valued by the Military 

None of the ROTC scholarship programs require you to major in any particular subject. But there is a significant advantage if you plan to major in a subject that will be valuable for your career in the military! 

For example, the Air Force ROTC scholarship program states that students pursuing technical majors, like computer science or mechanical engineering, may receive priority in the scholarship selection process. They also view some foreign languages, pre-med, nursing, and other medical-related majors under their list of highly desired majors. 

Exceed the Academic Requirements 

ROTC scholarships are merit-based, meaning the ROTC programs want to award the students with the best overall applicant profile. That means one way you can stand out is to make sure your grades and standardized test scores in high school and/or college are well above the minimum needed to apply. 

Boosting your academic performance may not come easy for everyone. But if you’re able to get extra help from school or free online study resources like Khan Academy, it’s definitely worth the investment in time! 

Where to Find More Scholarships 

If a career in the military sounds like a good fit for you, then you’ll definitely want to apply for one of the ROTC scholarships before or during your time in college. Use the information and tips we’ve shared here to know when and how to put together a winning application!

But don’t stop with just one scholarship application. You likely qualify for dozens of other amazing scholarships!

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how to apply for FAFSA, write amazing personal statements, and win competitive scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Happy Women’s History Month! March is a time to celebrate women’s enormous contributions to United States history. Of course, we at Scholly celebrate women’s incredible accomplishments all year. But we thought this would be a great opportunity to share a few of our favorite scholarships for women!

Below are the highlights about some amazing scholarships for women that we think you’ll love. A couple have deadlines approaching, so don’t miss out!

Click on the name of the scholarship for more information.

(And pssst… you’ll notice that some of these scholarships require essays. Check out our guide on how to write a scholarship essay that will help you win big!)

Our Top Picks: Scholarships for Women Students
Society of Women Engineers Scholarship

Scholarship Amount: Amounts vary, but last year, SWE awarded 260 new and renewed scholarships valued at more than $1,000,000! 

Deadline: May 1, 2021 (for freshman college students only)

Quick Facts: Society of Women Engineers has championed for women’s success in engineering and technology for over 70 years; providing scholarships is just one of the many ways they advocate for women in the field.

This scholarship is open to all woman-identifying students in community college, bachelors, or masters programs in engineering, engineering technology, and computer science.
You will need to include reference letters, due May 8.
SWE members and non-members are eligible for this scholarship.
Women in Computing Scholarship

Scholarship Amount: $1,000

Deadline: April 1, 2021

Quick Facts: To assist with dramatically rising costs of education, Leadview by Dotcom-Monitor offers a scholarship opportunity to female students studying computing.

To qualify, you will need to be a current, full-time, female student in an undergraduate program in the United States or Canada.
You must have completed at least one year (or declared your major) in computer engineering or a similar field.
You’ll need to answer a series of 3 short (500 word max) essay questions.
Empowering Women in Law Scholarship

Scholarship Amount: $1,500

Deadline: May 31, 2021

Quick Facts: The Pearce Law Firm in Philadelphia encourages achievement and leadership in the field of law and is open to women who are currently attending law school.

Applicants must have completed at least one semester of law school and have a GPA of 3.0 or higher.
This scholarship is awarded on the basis of academic achievement, extracurricular and community activities, leadership abilities, and financial need.
Letters of recommendation and resumes aren’t required but are strongly recommended.
ABC Wildlife Control & Prevention Scholarship

Scholarship Amount: $1,000

Deadline: July 1, 2021

Quick Facts: This annual scholarship is awarded by ABC Humane Wildlife Control & Prevention, an organization that humanely helps eliminate disturbances caused by animals including but not limited to: raccoons, skunks, squirrels, insects, etc.

This scholarship is open to women who are currently studying or plan to study the sciences (excluding the social sciences).
You must be currently enrolled in an accredited college or university in the United States.
You are required to complete a 1,000 word essay on why you’re passionate about studying science and how you will use your education to alleviate human suffering.
Jane M. Klausman Women in Business Scholarship

Scholarship Amount: Up to 32 scholarships of US$2,000 each awarded at the district/region level and six international scholarships in the amount of US$8,000 each

Deadline: The deadline to apply for the 2021 scholarship varies by Zonta club, but is typically between April and June. Contact your local Zonta club for the deadline.

Quick Facts: This scholarship is awarded by Zonta International to help women pursue undergraduate and master’s degrees in business management and overcome gender barriers from the classroom to the boardroom.

To be eligible for the Jane M. Klausman Women in Business Scholarship, you must: 

Be a women of any age, pursuing a business program with major field of specialization in accounting, economics, finance, business management, marketing, operations management, human resources management, international business, or entrepreneurship at an accredited university/college/institute
Demonstrate outstanding potential in the field and are living or studying in a Zonta district/region
Be enrolled in at least the second year of an undergraduate program through the final year of a Master’s program
Virginia Heinlein Memorial Scholarship

Scholarship Amount: $3,000

Deadline: April 1, 2021 

Quick Facts: This scholarship is awarded by The Heinlein Society to help women majoring in engineering, math, or biological or physical sciences afford the costs of an undergraduate education. 

To be eligible for the Virginia Heinlein Memorial Scholarship, you must: 

Be a full time undergraduate student enrolled for the 2021 – 2022 academic year in an accredited college that awards Bachelor of Science or Arts degrees
Major in Engineering, Math, or Biological or Physical Sciences, or Science Fiction as Literature
Complete an application that includes a brief explanation of your career goals, biographical information, and a 500 – 1,000 word essay on one of seven available topics
Want to Find More Scholarships for Women?

The scholarships for women we shared here are just a few of our favorite picks. There are many others that you likely qualify for! 

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how to pay for college, graduate debt-free, and win other scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship and the Fulbright Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Scholarships aren’t just for paying for college. Some scholarships can help you experience what it’s like to work or study abroad! One of the most popular scholarships of this kind is the Fulbright Scholarship. Established in 1946, the Fulbright Program has awarded 370,000 grants to give winning applicants the opportunity to study or live abroad for up to one year.

But, it’s important to tell you right away: Fulbright scholarships aren’t for undergraduates looking to study abroad for a semester. In most cases, to be eligible, you’ll need to have completed your bachelor’s degree before you can even be eligible. So, if you’re a college senior, graduate student, or working professional, this scholarship could be for you! 

And, in this post, we’re going to give you all the information you need to prepare a competitive application for the Fulbright U.S. Student Program. 

Here’s what we’ll cover: 

The 4 different types of Fulbright scholarships for U.S. citizens and how to pick the right one for you
The Fulbright scholarship eligibility requirements 
How much Fulbright scholarships are worth 
The 4 main steps to submit a Fulbright application
The Fulbright scholarship application timeline 
7 tips to help you increase your chances of winning a Fulbright Scholarship 
How the coronavirus pandemic has affected the Fulbright Program
What is a Fulbright Scholarship? 

A Fulbright Scholarship refers to any of the grants offered by the Fulbright Program to students and scholars from the U.S. and abroad. But, in this blog post, we’re focusing on the scholarships and grants offered through the Fulbright U.S. Student Program. 

Every year, the Fulbright U.S. Student Program awards approximately 1,000 scholarships for academic or creative study/research projects and 1,250 scholarships for English teaching assistantships. 

One of the first steps in applying for a Fulbright Scholarship is determining which of those award types best suits your goals. So, let’s take a quick look at each one before moving on to the general eligibility requirements. 

Academic Study/Research Awards

With an Academic Study/Research Award, you can design and complete an independent study or research project, take classes as a non-degree student at a foreign university, or directly enroll in a graduate degree program at a local university. 

When applying for this award, you’ll need to create and share a project or study proposal that demonstrates why your project needs to be carried out in the proposed country. For example, if you want to use the award to conduct research in Mexico, your proposal will need to include information on why Mexico is the ideal location for your project’s focus. Your project must also contribute to the Fulbright program’s goals of fostering mutual understanding and achieving diversity with foreign nations. 

Learn more about the Academic Study/Research Awards by watching this video of a former Fulbright scholar talking about his experience in India.

Creative & Performing Arts Study/Research Awards  

The Creative & Performing Arts Study/Research Awards are similar to the academic awards in that you can design and complete an independent study or research project, take classes as a non-degree student at a foreign university, or directly enroll in a graduate degree program at a local university. 

However, to be eligible for this award, you need to be looking to further improve your craft in one of the creative arts by practicing it in the country. You’ll also need to demonstrate a high level of experience and achievement in your artistic field by submitting an art portfolio. 

When applying for this award, your project or study proposal must also demonstrate why your creative project needs to be carried out in the proposed country. For example, if you wanted to use the award to study African sculpture in Ethiopia, your proposal will need to include information on why you’ve chosen Ethiopia over other African countries.

Learn more about the Fulbright Creative & Performing Arts Study/Research Awards by watching this video of a former recipient talking about her experience with documentary filmmaking while in Kiribati.

English Teaching Assistant Awards 

With an English Teaching Assistant Award, the Fulbright Program places you in a school or education center overseas to help teach English language classes. In addition to your teaching duties, you’ll also be expected to act as a cultural ambassador by doing things like delivering presentations on U.S. culture and engaging in community activities. In some cases, you may also be able to pursue an independent project or do volunteer work. 

Learn more about the Fulbright English Teaching Assistant Awards by watching this video of a former recipient talking about her experience in Jordan.

Fulbright-National Geographic Storytelling Fellowship

The Fulbright-National Geographic Storytelling Fellowship is a special research/study award for applicants who want to use digital media and storytelling to enhance cross-cultural connections with one or more host countries. 

With this award, you’ll receive training, support, and mentorship from professional National Geographic Editors. Your work will also be featured on a blog hosted by National Geographic and various other online publications! 

Learn more about the Fulbright-National Geographic Storytelling Fellowship by watching this video of a former recipient talking about his experience in Botswana.

How Much is a Fulbright Scholarship Worth? 

Since the cost of living varies across host countries, there is no exact dollar amount for Fulbright Scholarships. 

But, by winning a Fulbright Scholarship, you can expect: 

Round-trip transportation to the host country
Funding to cover room, board, and incidental costs, based on the cost of living in the host country
Accident & sickness health benefits
24/7 support line for urgent and non-urgent situations
12 months of non-competitive eligibility (NCE) hiring status within the federal government

In some countries, your scholarship may also include:

Book and research allowances
Mid-term enrichment activities
Full or partial tuition
Language study programs
Pre-departure and in-country orientations
Fulbright Scholarship Eligibility Requirements 

To apply for any of the Fulbright Scholarships, you must: 

Be a citizen of the United States of America at the time of application. Permanent residents are not eligible. 
Have received a bachelor’s degree or equivalent before the start of the grant. If you’re applying as a professional in the creative and performing arts, four years of professional training and/or experience also meets this requirement.
Meet the language requirements of the award that you are applying for and demonstrate enough proficiency to complete your project and adjust to life in the host country.

In addition to those basic eligibility requirements, the Fulbright Program also prefers that you: 

Have not previously held a Fulbright grant.
Pursued higher education primarily at educational institutions in the United States. However, studying abroad during your junior year or other periods of undergraduate study that are part of the normal curricula at U.S. colleges and universities are not considered a disadvantage.
Have not resided or studied in the country to which you are applying for more than six months, not counting undergraduate study abroad. Duty abroad in the Armed Forces of the United States is not considered disqualifying within the meaning of this section.
If you have served in the Armed Forces of the United States, you will be given preference, provided your qualifications are approximately equivalent to those of other candidates.
Have not had extensive, recent previous foreign experience in the host country you apply for. You’re still eligible to apply, but this will be a disadvantage.

If you’re applying as a professional, it’s important to also know: 

You may hold a J.D. at the time of application.
If you’re a Doctor of Medicine, you may receive grants for advanced academic study, but not for internships or residencies. However, the award does not authorize activity for which a license to practice medicine or nursing is required. The Fulbright Program also cannot authorize proposals for medical research that involves clinical training, patient care or patient contact.
How to Apply for a Fulbright Scholarship

The application requirements for the Fulbright scholarship vary depending on the country and type of award (e.g. academic research/study or English teaching assistant). But here are the general steps you’ll take no matter which award and country you choose to apply for. 

Step 1: Determine whether you’re applying through a U.S. institution or at-large

If you’re a senior year college student or recent college grad, it’s advised that you apply through your college. Why? Because your college will likely have a designated Fulbright Program Adviser who can guide you through the application process, schedule an on-campus interview, and make sure all of your application materials are submitted on time. 

Your college’s Fulbright Program Adviser will also set a campus deadline that’s earlier than the official application deadline. The Fulbright Program lets you search for the Fulbright Program Adviser at your college, so you can contact that person and get the most relevant information. 

If you decide to apply on your own, you’ll be considered an “at-large” candidate. That means you’ll be responsible for submitting a complete application through the Fulbright online application system by the national deadline.

Step 2: Select the award type and gather the required application materials 

If you’re applying for an Academic Study/Research Award, you’ll need the following materials for your application: 

Biographical data that includes your contact information, education and career history, list of awards and achievements, and any previous experience abroad
An abstract/summary of your proposal that gives an overview of your field of study, a title for your proposed project, a short description of your project, a description of how you plan to engage with the host community, and a description of your career or education plans upon returning to the US
A 2-page statement of grant purpose that goes into detail on what, how, and why you plan to study/research as a Fulbright scholar in the host country
An affiliation letter from the institution/individual in the host country with whom you are proposing to work or study
A 1-page personal statement that focuses on how your personal history and aspirations are related to what you hope to achieve as a Fulbright scholar
Foreign language evaluation forms (if required) demonstrating proficiency in the host country’s native language 
3 recommendation letters from people who can speak about your ability to carry out your proposed study/research project 
Academic transcripts from any institute of higher education where you’ve received a degree 
Documentation validating the ethics of your research project if you plan to run tests on humans or animals and want to later formally publish or use the results 

If you’re applying for a Creative & Performing Arts Study/Research Award, you’ll need the following materials for your application: 

Biographical data that includes your contact information, education and career history, list of awards and achievements, and any previous experience abroad
An abstract/summary of your proposal that gives an overview of your field of study, a title for your proposed project, a short description of your project, a description of how you plan to engage with the host community, a description of your relevant arts experience, a description of your art portfolio, and a description of your career or education plans upon returning to the US
A 2-page statement of grant purpose that goes into detail on what, how, and why you plan to study/research as a Fulbright scholar in the host country
An affiliation letter from the institution/individual in the host country with whom you are proposing to work or study
A 1-page personal statement that focuses on how your personal history and aspirations are related to what you hope to achieve as a Fulbright scholar
Foreign language evaluation forms (if required) demonstrating proficiency in the host country’s native language 
3 recommendation letters from people who can speak about your ability to carry out your proposed study/research project 
Academic transcripts from any institute of higher education where you’ve received a degree 
Your art portfolio (requirements for the arts portfolio vary depending on your artistic discipline)
Documentation validating the ethics of your research project if you plan to run tests on humans or animals and want to later formally publish or use the results 

If you’re applying for an English Teaching Assistant Award, you’ll need the following materials for your application: 

Biographical data that includes your contact information, education and career history, list of awards and achievements, and any previous experience abroad
An abstract/summary of your proposal that gives an overview of why you hope to teach English in the host country, a description of how you plan to engage with the host community, and a description of your career or education plans upon returning to the US
A 2-page statement of grant purpose that goes into detail on what experience and ideas you’d bring to teaching English in the host country 
A 1-page personal statement that focuses on how your personal history and aspirations are related to what you hope to achieve as a Fulbright English Teaching Assistant
Foreign language evaluation forms (if required) demonstrating proficiency in the host country’s native language 
3 recommendation letters from people who can speak about your ability to succeed as an English Teaching Assistant
Academic transcripts from any institute of higher education where you’ve received a degree 

If you’re applying for a Fulbright-National Geographic Storytelling Fellowship, you’ll need the following materials for your application: 

Biographical data that includes your contact information, education and career history, list of awards and achievements, and any previous experience abroad
An abstract/summary of your proposal that gives an overview of your field of study, a title for your proposed project, a short description of your project, a description of how you plan to engage with the host community, and a description of your career or education plans upon returning to the US
A 2-page statement of grant purpose that goes into detail on what, how, and why you plan to study/research as a Fulbright scholar in the host country
An affiliation letter from the institution/individual in the host country with whom you are proposing to work or study
A 1-page personal statement that focuses on how your personal history and aspirations are related to what you hope to achieve as a Fulbright scholar
Foreign language evaluation forms (if required) demonstrating proficiency in the host country’s native language 
3 recommendation letters from people who can speak about your ability to carry out your proposed study/research project 
Academic transcripts from any institute of higher education where you’ve received a degree 
Documentation validating the ethics of your research project if you plan to run tests on humans or animals and want to later formally publish or use the results 
A 1-page storytelling proposal that outlines how you plan to use storytelling techniques to add value to your study/research project 
A 1-page storytelling portfolio that links to relevant work samples 
Step 3: Select a country and review additional eligibility requirements 

Currently, the Fulbright U.S. Student Program allows applicants to study, research or teach in 170+ countries!

But certain Fulbright awards are not available in some counties. To give an obvious example, you can apply for a Study/Research Award in New Zealand but not an English Teaching Assistant Award.  

So, before you set your heart on going to one country in particular, make sure it’s a location where you can apply for the type of award you want. Also, check to see if there are any requirements in addition to the ones we listed in the previous section. 

Step 4: Submit your application and prepare for potential follow-up steps 

Once you’ve gathered and completed all of your application materials and selected your proposed host country, you can submit your application! 

If you’re applying as an at-large candidate, there’s nothing left for you to do. But if you’re applying through an academic institution, you’ll need to first submit your application by the campus deadline (usually 4-6 weeks before the official deadline) and prepare for an on-campus interview. 

As we mentioned previously, your campus’s Fulbright Program Adviser will schedule the on-campus interview sometime after receiving your application. Typically, the interview will be conducted by several of the campus’s faculty members who will ask questions and give feedback on the quality of your application. Following the interview, you’ll have the opportunity to revise your application and resubmit it by the official deadline. 

But when is the Fulbright Scholarship official deadline? Let’s take a look in the next section along with all of the other important dates you need to know! 

Fulbright Scholarship Application Timeline

The application cycle for the Fulbright Scholarship spans over a year. Here’s the full application timeline so you can begin planning your application today!

February: The Fulbright Scholarship application opens.

August – September: The campus deadline for applicants applying through an academic institution typically occurs during these months. You may also be asked to have an on-campus interview during this period.

September: The official deadline to submit the Fulbright online application is September 15 at 11:59PM (PST).

October – November: Applications are reviewed to ensure eligibility and completeness. You may be notified to provide additional documentation. Complete applications are then forwarded to peer reviewers. 

November – December: You are notified by email whether or not your application has been recommended for further consideration in the host country.

December – May: Public Affairs Sections of U.S. Embassies or binational Fulbright Commissions overseas review the recommended applications and nominate candidates for selection.

January – June: If your application is nominated, it gets forwarded to the Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board for approval. You’ll then be notified whether you have been selected to receive a Fulbright award.

7 Tips to Increase Your Chances of Winning a Fulbright Scholarship 

As we’re sure you can imagine, the Fulbright U.S. Student Program receives thousands of applicants every year. And generally, only around 20% of applicants will win one of the Fulbright awards. 

This may make you hesitate to apply. But as some of the past Fulbright scholars mention in the video below: stop doubting yourself and apply even if you don’t think you’ll have a perfect application!  

By following the 7 tips below, you can also increase your chances of winning a Fulbright Scholarship!

Apply through your college or alma mater 

Unless you never went to college, you’re better off applying through an academic institution rather than by yourself. This is true even if it’s been years since you graduated.

For one, by applying through an academic institution, you’ll get support and guidance on how to submit the best application possible from a Fulbright Program Adviser. And, you also get the opportunity to revise your application based on the feedback you get following the on-campus interview. For a competitive scholarship like this one, these opportunities are too good to pass up! 

Study the host country’s language even if it’s not required for the application

Although you can apply for some Fulbright scholarships without needing to speak a foreign language, your application will be more competitive if you do. 

Remember: one of the primary goals of the Fulbright program is for recipients to engage and connect with the local community. And oftentimes that’s not really possible if you’re not able to speak the local language. 

Learn as much as you can about the host country’s culture and history

When putting together your Fulbright application, you’ll be asked to state why you’ve selected your proposed country. And just picking a country where you’ve always wanted to travel isn’t a strong enough reason. So, do your research!

Look for ways to draw connections between your interests, academic and/or work experience, and plans for the future with the host country’s culture and history. You’ll be happy you did when it comes time to write your proposal, statement of grant purpose, personal statement, and other relevant application materials!

Don’t apply for an award in a country where you have a lot of previous experience 

You may be itching to go back to the country where you were originally born or lived in the past. But applying for a Fulbright scholarship to go there is usually not a good idea! 

The Fulbright Program sees it as a disadvantage if you have extensive experience in the host country. So, you’re better off applying for the scholarship to go somewhere new or, better yet, somewhere that you’ve learned a lot about while in the U.S. 

Choose the people writing your recommendations wisely 

The Fulbright Program will use your recommendation letters as a way to evaluate whether you’ll be able to complete your proposed study/research project or teaching assistantship. Make sure the people you ask to write the recommendation know that. Otherwise, you may end up with letters that are just about how the recommender views your character. And that’s not what the Fulbright Program wants! 

To get the best recommendation letter, the Fulbright Program recommends attaching your statement of grant purpose and personal statement with your recommendation requests. To be safe, it’s also a good idea to give your recommenders 3-4 weeks to write the letter.

And, if you think it’s necessary, you may also want to provide some general guidelines to the recommender on how to write a scholarship recommendation letter. 

Get feedback on your abstract, proposal, and essays

Have at least one person (e.g. a professor, friend, or advisor) give you feedback on your abstract, proposal, statement of grant purpose, and personal statement. Ideally, this person will be able to tell you if: 

You’ve provided enough evidence to show you’re capable of carrying out your study/research project or being an effective English teaching assistant. 
Your reason for selecting your proposed country is clear.
You’ve shown how you plan to engage with the host community. 
You didn’t leave out any important information. 

If you get their feedback early enough, you can go back to revise and make your application materials as strong as possible!

Start preparing your application as early as possible 

No matter which award you apply for, there’s a lot that goes into putting together a Fulbright application! There are certain application materials, such as the affiliate letter for study/research projects or the letters of recommendation, that could take months to get. So, start early so you can put together the best application without rushing to get everything done last minute!

How Has the Coronavirus Pandemic Affected the Fulbright Program

As you’re well aware, COVID-19 has made traveling to certain international destinations nearly impossible. So, you’re right to wonder if getting a Fulbright scholarship to go abroad is still even a thing. It is! But there is some uncertainty you need to be aware of. 

Here’s a bit of the most recent statement from the Fulbright Program:

“March 2022 – In planning for and implementing the resumption of in-person exchanges for U.S. participants, the U.S. Department of State and the Fulbright Program continue to prioritize the health, safety, and well-being of participants and host communities. Fulbright is a global program and has tailored its plans on a country-by-country basis to resume in-person exchanges for U.S. participants beginning January 1, 2021. The decision to allow in-person exchanges to resume is based on the operating status of the host institutions, the administrative resources in place at the U.S. Embassy or Fulbright Commission to support participants while on their program, the availability of international travel and visa services, and the capacity of local facilities to protect public health.

Many countries have begun to welcome U.S. Student Fulbright participants, and we are working closely with those traveling abroad to ensure their safety.”

Of course, these things can change quickly! So, for the most up-to-date information, check the Fulbright Program Information on Coronavirus (COVID-19).

Where to Find More Scholarships 

The Fulbright Scholarship is an amazing opportunity to experience what it’s like to study, conduct research or teach English in a foreign country. We hope all the tips and information we’ve shared here will help you put together the strongest application you can! 

And if you’d like to find more scholarships like this one, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how to apply for scholarships and other forms of financial aid, pay off your student loans, and much more!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If one of your students asks you to write them a recommendation letter for a scholarship, it’s a big deal! 

Some of the most popular scholarships receive thousands of applications from hopeful students every year. And only a small percentage of applicants end up winning. 

Scholarship selection committees use your recommendation letter as a way to get an outside perspective of the student. This makes their job of selecting the most deserving students a little bit easier. 

Luckily, for you and your students, there’s an easy way to get all the information you need to write a strong recommendation letter! We’ll be sharing what that is later in this blog post. And, we’ll also be looking at:

Why scholarship applications require a recommendation letter 
What information needs to go into a scholarship recommendation letter 
How you can help your students find more scholarships using a scholarship search tool 

Let’s get right to it! 

The Purpose of a Letter of Recommendation for Scholarship Applications

The application review process of many scholarships spans months. And, in that time, there can be a lot of nitpicking over students who, oftentimes, start to look fairly similar on paper.

Your recommendation letter helps your student by: 

Giving the selection committee a more holistic understanding of the student’s unique academic strengths and potential to succeed
Providing an objective perspective on how the student demonstrates qualities the scholarship foundation wants to be represented in its scholars 

BUT your recommendation letter can only do those things if it includes all of the information scholarship selection committees are looking for. 

What to Include in Your Scholarship Recommendation Letter

Your experience with each student that asks you for a recommendation is likely unique. And you’ll want to make sure each letter sounds authentic and not like a copy and paste template. 

But, even still, the best recommendation letters follow a similar format: 

An introduction that identifies who you are, your relationship to the student, and how long you’ve known them
Your general observations and thoughts about the student’s academic strengths, personal qualities, and readiness for college 
Specific examples that support those observations and thoughts
A summary that includes why you think this student is a good fit for this particular scholarship 
A closing that says you’re open to being contacted for more information if needed 
How to Get All the Info You Need to Write a Strong Scholarship Recommendation Letter  

Writing a strong recommendation letter for some of your students might come easy. Maybe you’ve known these students for several years, coached them outside of class for extracurriculars, or been their teacher for more than one subject. 

But what about the students who you don’t know so well? And what about when you have to write multiple recommendation letters for students applying to scholarships with upcoming deadlines? What do you do then? 

You ask your students! But, don’t worry, no one’s expecting you to sit down with each student. You don’t have time for that. 

Instead, you’re going to get your students to do the work. How? By getting them to create and send you a document that has the following information: 

The student’s name, grade, test scores, and GPA   
The name of the scholarship, eligibility criteria, and the website where you can find more information
The deadline for your recommendation letter and information on how you submit it
3-4 sentences about why they think they’re a good fit for the scholarship
2-3 of their greatest academic achievements in or outside of school 
2-3 extracurricular achievements they’re proud of from in or outside of school activities 
A brief summary (200 words max) of what they wrote about in their scholarship application essay (if applicable) so that you don’t repeat information or stories they’ve already covered in detail
What classes they have taken with you, a brief description of a lesson or activity they enjoyed in your class, and why they specifically chose you to write a recommendation 

This may seem like a lot of information. And you probably won’t need all of it. But, believe us, you’ll be happy you asked for it when it comes time for you to sit down and write! 

And if you think your students will be intimidated by that list, consider copying it onto a nice-looking Word Doc first. Or use something like the Common App’s brag sheet that serves the same purpose. 

Sample Letter of Recommendation for a Scholarship 

Let’s look now at an example of what a strong recommendation letter looks like. 

To whom it may concern: 

I’m delighted to recommend Louis D. for the ABC scholarship. I have been Louis’s English teacher and debate team coach at A.W. High School for the past three years and know that he is exactly the kind of student your foundation hopes to reward. 

Throughout my career, I’ve met very few students that are as inquisitive and engaged with the local community as Louis. In my English class, he regularly leads class discussions and writes in a way most students only grasp once they’ve spent several years in college. I can say without a doubt that he is in the top 10% of students I’ve had the pleasure to work with during my 15 years as a teacher. 

Louis is also the debate team captain and makes my job as the coach incredibly easy as he’s always going out of his way to help new members improve. For example, in preparation for a recent debate tournament, he spent several hours working one-on-one with one student who was new to the team and still struggling with stage fright. Although Louis didn’t do as well as he would have liked to in that tournament, he still took immense pride in seeing how much his teammate improved in just a short time. 

This willingness to help others is also reflected in Louis’s community service work — something I know the ABC scholarship foundation greatly values. Outside of school, Louis is actively involved in tutoring ESL learners at a local community center. Although I’m not present at the center, it’s easy for me to imagine how lucky those students must feel to have a tutor like Louis. His work ethic and dedication to helping people improve are impeccable.  

I have full confidence that Louis will continue to do great things next year when he begins college at Rice University. I also am confident that the ABC Scholarship Foundation would be hard-pressed to find another student as deserving and representative of your mission to support the future community leaders of America.

It is for these reasons I’ve had zero hesitation to write this recommendation for Louis. 

Please feel free to contact me at ###-###-#### or samgreen@awhs.com if you have any questions. I’d be more than happy to provide more information on why Louis is a deserving candidate for the ABC scholarship. 

Sincerely,

Sam Green 

Want to Help Your Students Find More Scholarships? 

As an educator, you want to see your students succeed. We hope you can use the tips we shared here to write strong recommendation letters for the scholarships that will help lower their costs for college.

And, if you want to go the extra mile, make sure they’re not just applying to one or two scholarships. Encourage them to find all of the scholarships they qualify for! 

To easily find them, they can download Scholly, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches students with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on their interests, accomplishments, and traits!

You can also share information from the rest of our blog where we provide in-depth guides and articles on how students can find ways to pay for college, write amazing scholarship essays and personal statements, and win a variety of scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
The National Merit Scholarship is one of the most popular scholarships among ambitious high school students. Not surprisingly, that also makes it one of the most competitive.

In fact, approximately 1.5 million high school students enter the National Merit Scholarship Program each year. And only 7,600 students make it past the final round to win the scholarship! 

But who’s to say you can’t be one of them? There’s nothing wrong with a little competition! Plus, as long as you’re also applying for less competitive scholarships, you’ve got nothing to lose. 

So, our advice: apply to all the scholarships that are specifically offered to students with your unique background and goals, which you can quickly and easily by signing up for Scholly! AND, at the same time, do your best to prepare yourself as a strong candidate for the National Merit Scholarship.

To help you out, in this post, we’re going to cover everything you need to know about the National Merit Scholarship Program. When you finish reading, you’ll know how to answer: 

How much are National Merit Scholarships worth?
What are the National Merit Scholarships eligibility requirements?
How are National Merit Scholarships recipients chosen?
What is the average PSAT score needed for the National Merit Scholarships?
What is the National Merit Scholarship application timeline?

We’ll also end by sharing 5 tips to improve your chances of winning a National Merit Scholarship! 

But before we dive in, let’s start with a quick overview of the National Merit Scholarship Program.  

What is the National Merit Scholarship Program? 

The National Merit Scholarship Program is an academic scholarship competition for high school students. Specifically, it’s for US-based high school students and high school students who are U.S. citizens studying abroad. The program is run by the National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NSMC) and has been around since 1955. 

We cover all of the eligibility requirements later in this post. But, first, it’s important to know the most significant factor is definitely your score on the PSAT/NMSQT. 

What is the PSAT/NMSQT? 

The Preliminary SAT/National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (PSAT/NMSQT) is a multiple-choice standardized exam that tests your knowledge in math, evidence-based reading, and writing.

Your score for each section of the exam will fall between 160–760, which means a perfect score would be 1520. But that’s not the score that will determine your competitiveness for a National Merit Scholarship. 

Instead, the NSMC will be looking at your selection index score, which will be between 48-228. If you’re not sure what your selection index score is, you can use CollegePanda’s easy-to-use PSAT National Merit Cutoff Calculator.

How Are National Merit Scholarship Recipients Chosen?

After all of the PSAT/NMSQT exams have been taken and scored, the National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NMSC) selects around 50,000 students with the highest scores to become commended students or semifinalists. 

What’s the difference? 

Commended Students

Commended students make up around 34,000 of the 50,000 selected students. If you land in this bracket of students, you’ll receive recognition for your killer exam scores and academic promise. Unfortunately, though, you don’t get to continue in the competition.

But, as a commended student, you may still be eligible for special scholarships sponsored by participating corporations and businesses.

Semifinalists 

Semifinalists, on the other hand, make up the remaining 16,000 students. To make sure all US states are represented among the semifinalists, the NSMC selects students on a state-representational basis. 

You’re likely to be selected as a semifinalist if you have the highest scores among students from your state. In a minute, we’ll look at the average PSAT scores for each state so you know what to aim for! Why? Because you’ll have a better chance of becoming a finalist if you’ve scored above your state’s average. 

Finalists 

To advance from a semifinalist to one of the 15,000 finalists, you’ll need to meet some requirements in addition to your test scores.

According to the 2022 instructions and requirements for semifinalists, to advance from semifinalist to finalist standing you’ll need to: 

Continue to meet the program entry requirements (listed in the next section) 
Be enrolled in the last year of high school and be planning to enroll full time in college in the fall of 2022 or be enrolled in the first year of college, if you completed grades 9 through 12 in three years or less.
Attend high school in the United States, District of Columbia, or U.S. commonwealths and territories; or, meet the citizenship requirements for students attending high school outside the United States
Be fully endorsed for Finalist standing and recommended for a National Merit Scholarship by your high school principal (or school official designated by the principal). 
Have a record of consistently very high academic performance in all of grades 9 through 12 and in any college course work taken. 
Your official scores on either the SAT or ACT. 
Submit the National Merit Scholarship application to your high school official as soon as possible using NMSC’s Online Scholarship Application (OSA). The school official will complete the school’s sections of the application for final submission to NMSC.
Provide any additional documentation and information that NMSC requests (e.g. proof of permanent residency or information about when you plan to become a permanent resident/U.S. citizen) 
Special Instructions for College Students

If you’ve already begun college when you find out you’re a Semifinalist, you’ll need to contact the high school you last attended ASAP. Why? Because they’ll be responsible for completing the high school portion of your National Merit Semifinalist Application. 

As a college student, you’ll also need to have your college send NMSC an official transcript of

all college course work you have taken. This also needs to be done ASAP to ensure your application gets reviewed in time! 

National Merit Scholarship Winners 

The approximately 7,600 National Merit Scholars are chosen from the pool of Finalists. A selection committee will evaluate your application based on: 

Your academic record
Information about your school’s curriculum and grading system 
Your PSAT/NMSQT Selection Index Score
Your high school official’s written recommendation
Information about your extracurricular activities and leadership
Your scholarship application essay
National Merit Scholarship Eligibility Requirements 

With 1.5 million students entering the National Merit Scholarship Program every year, there’s a good chance you’re also eligible. But let’s make sure!

According to the official guidelines, to participate in the National Merit Scholarship Program, you must: 

Take the PSAT/NMSQT no later than the third year in grades 9 through 12. When you take the test you’ll need to answer some questions to confirm you’d like to enter the scholarship program. 
Be enrolled as a high school student (traditional or homeschooled), progressing normally toward graduation or completion of high school, and planning to accept admission to college no later than the fall following completion of high school
Attend high school in the United States, the District of Columbia, or U.S. commonwealth and territory or meet the citizenship requirements for students attending high school outside the United States

If you attend high school outside the U.S., you must: 

Be a citizen of the United States; or be a U.S. lawful resident (or have applied for permanent residence, the application for which has not been denied) and intend to become a U.S. citizen at the earliest opportunity allowed by law
How Much Are National Merit Scholarships Worth? 

If you’re chosen as one of the 7,6000 winners, you’ll receive one of the following scholarships, worth at least $2,500: 

National Merit Scholarships
Corporate-Sponsored Merit Scholarships 
College-Sponsored Merit Scholarships

The National Merit Scholarships are the scholarships available to all winners. They’re worth $2,500 and are only good for one year.

The Corporate-Sponsored Merit Scholarships are for the winners who: 

Are children of a participating company’s employees or members
Reside in the participating company’s community
Have career plans related to the participating company. 

Unlike the National Merit Scholarship, some Corporate-Sponsored Merit Scholarships are worth $2,500 + additional stipends and can be renewable. The exact amount for these scholarships will depend on the sponsoring company. 

The College-Sponsored Merit Scholarships are four-year renewable scholarships for the winner’s chosen college, as long as the college participates in the program. The sponsoring college chooses the winners of $2,500 scholarships and may provide additional stipends. 

You can check out the full list of corporations and colleges that participate in the National Merit Scholarship Program here!

Average PSAT Scores by State Needed for National Merit Scholarships 

Here are the official cutoff PSAT scores by state for students who advanced as semifinalists in the class of 2021:

Alabama	212
Alaska	212
Arizona	218
Arkansas	212
California	221
Colorado	217
Connecticut	220
Delaware	219
District of Columbia	222
Florida	216
Georgia	219
Hawaii	217
Idaho	214
Illinois	219
Indiana	215
Iowa	212
Kansas	214
Kentucky	214
Louisiana	212
Maine	213
Maryland	221
Massachusetts	222
Michigan	216
Minnesota	218
Mississippi	211
Missouri	214
Montana	210
Nebraska	213
Nevada	215
New Hampshire	215
New Jersey	222
New Mexico	211
New York	220
North Carolina	217
North Dakota	209
Ohio	215
Oklahoma	211
Oregon	217
Pennsylvania	217
Rhode Island	216
South Carolina	212
South Dakota	209
Tennessee	215
Texas	219
Utah	212
Vermont	212
Virginia	221
Washington	220
West Virginia	209
Wisconsin	213
Wyoming	209
​U.S. Abroad	222
​U.S. Territories	209
National Merit Scholarship Timeline 

So, as you may have noticed, there are a lot of steps to become a winner of the National Merit Scholarship. From taking the PSAT/NMSQT to being selected as a winner, here’s the timeline: 

October: You take the PSAT/NMSQT (typically in your junior year)

May: The NMSC announces the 50,000 commended students 

September: The NMSC announces the 16,000 semi-finalists who will then need to complete the National Merit Semifinalist Application 

February: The NMSC announces the 15,000 finalists

March-May: The NSMC announces the 7,600 National Merit Scholarship winners

5 Tips to Improve Your Chances of Winning a National Merit Scholarship 

Want to give yourself the best shot of making it to the last round of the National Merit Scholarship Program? Follow these 5 tips! 

Work on Your English and Math Test-Taking Skills 

As you now know, you’ll need a pretty good score on the PSAT/NMSQT to even qualify for the National Merit Scholarship. And, if you’re selected as a semifinalist, you may also need to submit your scores on the SAT or ACT. 

What do all of these standardized exams have in common? They’re a test of your knowledge in reading & language arts and mathematics. So, if you’re serious about winning, try to put some extra effort into improving your test-taking skills in these areas.

Not sure how to get started? Check out Khan Academy’s free test prep!

Maintain a GPA of at least 3.5 or better

A high PSAT score may get you to the semi finalist round. But from there, you’ll have a better shot of winning the National Merit Scholarship if the rest of your application is just as strong. 

When completing the high school portion of your semifinalist application, the NMSC asks your high school officials to report if there has been any decline in your academic performance for the current year. 

So, if you find yourself struggling in one of your classes, be sure to get help from your teachers, a tutor, or free online resources.

Stay committed to extracurricular activities

If chosen as a semifinalist, you’ll also need to share information about your involvement in extracurricular activities, community service, leadership positions, honors or awards, and employment.

You’ll make the best impression with your activities if you’ve been actively involved for several years and have some sort of leadership role. Why? Because the NMSC will be looking to see what kind of things you’re passionate about and committed to. 

Maintain positive relationships with your principal and other school officials

You’ll need your principal or a similar school official to endorse your application, report any updates on your academic performance, and provide a recommendation. And the NMSC gives them the right to revoke their endorsement at any point in the competition.

So, make sure your teachers and principal know ahead of time that you’ll be applying for the National Merit Scholarship! You’ll want to make sure they’re ready to support you every step of the way. 

Writing an excellent scholarship essay

The last part of the National Merit Semifinalist application is a personal essay. This is one of the few parts of the application where you get to really express who’s behind the test scores and grades. 

So, you’ll want to spend some time making this essay good! If you’re not sure what to write about, you can check out these in-depth guides on how to write spectacular scholarship essays and personal statements.

Where to Find More Scholarships 

The National Merit Scholarship Program is one of the most competitive scholarship programs you can find. But, with the right preparation, you can compete and win! 

We hope the information we’ve shared here helps you make that happen. But don’t stop there! You’ll have the highest chance of reducing your costs for college if you apply for as many scholarships as you can. 

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the Burger King Scholarship and the McDonald’s Scholarships.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Winning scholarships is a feeling unlike any other. 

That’s because scholarships can help you avoid the stress of student loans, explore new opportunities in and out of school, gain access to a community of ambitious students just like you, and so much more! (We mean, these are definitely some of the reasons we’re so happy to help students every year win over $100 million with Scholly Search!)

So, why not say thanks to the person or organization who helped make all that happen by writing a nice thank you letter? Writing it is quick, easy, and will help make sure the scholarship is around for years to come! 

But what exactly should you write in that letter? Does it need to go into a lot of detail on what you’ll use the scholarship for? Or is something short and sweet good enough? Can you send it by email?

These are all good questions! And we’ll be answering each of them and more in the post. We’ll also be sharing some examples of scholarship thank you letters that use an easy-to-replicate template! But, before we do, let’s start with why you should write a scholarship thank you letter. 

What is a Scholarship Thank You Letter? 

A scholarship thank you letter is a short, formal letter that you write to donors and/or committees of scholarship organizations. It’s a way to show appreciation for the financial assistance that will help support your education. 

Some college supported scholarships require you to write a thank you letter to the sponsor or donor after receiving your scholarships. But often, the choice of whether or not to write the letter is up to you. You won’t lose your scholarship just because you don’t write a thank you letter. So, why do it? 

Why You Should Write a Thank You Letter to Scholarship Donors 

We know, we know. You’ve got a ton of other things to do for school and applications for other scholarships. But, here’s why, if you can, you should carve out a bit of time to write the letter: 

Show your gratitude and appreciation for the people and organization that support students with your background pay for college 
Help ensure that the organization stays committed to issuing the scholarships to other students like you in the future 
Potentially make lasting connections with people within the scholarship organization who can help you later in life

On top of all that, scholarship thank you letters are super easy and quick to write – 10 minutes, tops! Plus, writing the thank you letter is a good way to practice business writing, which is a good skill to start developing.  

What to Include in Your Scholarship Thank You Letter

When writing your thank you letter, you’ll need to include: 

A greeting to the donor
An expression of gratitude for the scholarship
A bit on how the scholarship will help you 
What you plan to do in the future (optional)
Your signature

Let’s quickly look at each of those in a bit more detail! 

Greeting to the donor

A short greeting is all you need. Something like “Dear Members of the [Scholarship] Foundation” or “Hello Mrs. Last Name”. 

Expression of gratitude

In this section, you’ll just want to quickly thank the scholarship donor or organization for selecting you as one of the recipients for the scholarships. This can be as short as 1 or 2 sentences. 

How the scholarship will help you 

You don’t need to go into too much detail here. But the recipient of the letter will love hearing how the scholarship will have an impact on your life. Give them a few details of how the scholarship will help you succeed in your education. 

Your future plans (optional) 

Not everyone has a clear idea of what they hope to do in the future. But if you do have a few ideas for your future plans, you can also include them in your letter. The letter recipient will be glad to hear how their organization is helping you get to where you want to go in life! 

Your signature 

This last part is easy. End your email with a formal signature like “Sincerely”, “Best wishes” or “Kind regards”. 

Thank You Letter for a Scholarship Tips

Coming up in the next section, we’re going to look at samples of scholarship thank you letters and a template you can use. But before we do, let’s first look at best practices and tips for writing a great thank you letter. 

Use a formal, business letter format

If you’ve never written a formal business letter, your scholarship thank you letter is a good chance to start! But don’t be fooled by the words “formal” or “business”. There’s nothing complicated here. Just make sure you structure your letter like this:

If you choose to email the letter instead of sending it by mail — this is definitely okay, by the way — follow the same format as the letter above. Just leave out the date and address at the top. And for the email subject line, write something simple like “Thank You” or  “Thank you for your help”. We have an example of what this looks like down below as well! 

Show gratitude and sincerity 

This tip goes without saying. So, why mention it here? Because you may feel that you’re being forced to be super positive, exaggerated, or ‘extra’ by saying how appreciative you are in your letter. But you’re not! Be the real you when expressing gratitude for receiving the scholarship. 

Write clearly and concisely 

The recipient of the letter likely shouldn’t have to spend time trying to decipher your letter. So, make sure it’s short, sweet, and easy-to-read! If you follow the upcoming template, you’ll be good to go!

Proofread your letter for spelling and grammar 

We all make occasional mistakes in spelling and grammar when writing anything — be it scholarship thank you letters, personal statements, or scholarship essays. So, be sure to proofread and edit your letter so that the person reading it isn’t distracted by missing punctuation, a there that should be a their or — worst of all — a letter addressed to the wrong organization. 

Scholarship Thank You Letter Template 

As we’ve mentioned, writing your scholarship thank you letter is fairly easy. But to save some time, you can start with a template like this: 

[Date]

[Address of Scholarship Foundation]

Dear [Name of Scholarship] Committee: 

I’m writing to [say thank you/express how grateful I am] to be chosen as a recipient for the [Name of Scholarship]. 

[1-2 sentences on how the scholarship will help you and your future plans]. 

Thank you again for your time! 

Sincerely,

[Your Name]

Scholarship Thank You Letter Samples

Curious to see what a good scholarship thank you letter looks like once you plug in all of that information into the template above? Here are two examples! 

Example #1 – Scholarship Thank You Letter Sent by Mail

January 5, 2020 

Coca-Cola Scholars Foundation

PO Box 442

Atlanta, GA  30301

Dear Coca-Cola Scholars Foundation Committee: 

I’m writing to express how grateful I am for being chosen as one of this year’s recipients for the Coca-Cola Scholarship. 

Thanks to you and the Coca-Cola Scholars Foundation, I’ll be able to devote more time to my studies this year without needing to take out another student loan. I’m planning to pursue a career in medicine and know that this support is an investment in my future. 

Thank you again for your time and all your work! 

Sincerely, 

Your Name 

Example #2 – Scholarship Thank You Letter Sent by Email 

Subject Line: Thank You! 

Dear Taco Bell Foundation: 

I’m writing to say thank you so much for selecting me as a recipient for the Liv Más Scholarship! 

With this scholarship, I’ll be the first person in my family to attend college. I feel so lucky knowing I won’t have to worry about how to pay for things like on-campus housing and textbooks. 

All of your work is appreciated, and I thank you for making college possible for students like me! 

Kind regards,

Your Name 

What to Do Next 

If you use the format, tips, template, and example we’ve shared in this post, you should be able to write a thank you letter for your scholarships in no time! 

Once you’re done, take some review whether there’s anything else you need to do to keep your costs for college low. For example, have you completed this year’s FAFSA? Are there any other scholarships you can still apply for? Will you need to take out any student loans? 

If you answered yes to any of those questions, we got you covered! Check out Scholly’s blog where we regularly publish posts on topics like how to apply for scholarships and learn everything you need to know about your college financial aid!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Paying off your student loan debt is one of the best financial moves you can make. But, as you most likely know, it isn’t easy. 

The 2020 CARES Act has provided some relief from just how difficult it can be in the form of forbearance on federal student loans. But with mandatory payments set to resume again after August 2022, it’s important to either develop or revisit your strategy for paying off your student loans. 

So, to help you out, we’ll be covering everything you need to know on how to pay off your student loans in this in-depth blog post. Specifically, we’ll be looking into:

Student loan repayment plan options (AND how signing up Scholly PayOff can quickly help you lower your monthly payments by up to $3,000 per year!) 
Repayment plans for getting rid of private student loans 
Whether or not you should consider consolidating your student loans 
What you need to know about student loan forgiveness programs 
How long it typically takes to pay off student loans in full 
5 tips and strategies to pay off your student loans fast

Let’s dive right in! 

(Wait! One more thing. If you’re actually looking for information on what you should know before taking out student loans, start with How to Choose a Student Loan!) 

Federal Student Loan Repayment Plans

If you’ve taken out a student loan before, there’s a good chance it’s a federal student loan.  According to the academic data sharing platform MeasureOne, 92% of all student loans are federal student loans. But how much you pay and how quickly you can pay them off depends on your student loan repayment plan.

That’s why it’s important you review each repayment plan and make an informed decision about the best one for you. To help you do just that, we’ll start by going over the repayment plan everyone gets put onto by default, the Standard Repayment Plan, and then move on to talking about the more popular income-driven repayment plans. 

But, if you’re scanning this blog post and already thinking tl;dr, you can save yourself some time by signing up for Scholly PayOff! It’s our new tool that helps you instantly find the best federal student loan repayment plan specifically for you (i.e. the one that will save you the most $$$ while still working toward paying off your student loans).

Standard Repayment Plan

If you’ve never looked into your student loan repayment options, you’re likely on the Standard Repayment Plan right now. Why? Because this is the repayment plan you’re automatically put on when it comes time to start paying back your loans post-graduation. 

Does that mean it’s the best repayment plan for you? Not necessarily. But it could be a good fit for you if you have a high income and can afford to make large monthly payments (the benefit here is that you’ll minimize interest payments).

How does the Standard Repayment Plan work? 

The Standard Repayment Plan sets your payments at a fixed amount that allows you to pay off your student loans in 10 years or less. This includes paying for any interest accrued during that period. 

So, for example, let’s say you owe $35,000 on your student loans, which have a student loan interest rate of 6.5%. With a repayment period of 10 years, your monthly payments would be $409. 

To quickly calculate what your monthly payments would be under the Standard Repayment Plan, you can use this student loan calculator. 

What happens if that standard monthly payment is too high for your budget? 

Well, you could apply for forbearance to postpone your payments. But because you’d be racking up interest during that time, that’s not your best option. What is? Switching repayment plans! 

The most popular repayment plans are the income-driven repayment plans, which allow you to make affordable monthly payments that are relative to your income. Let’s look at those now! 

Income-Based Repayment (IBR) Plan

Of all of the income-driven repayment plans, the Income-Based Repayment plan is the most popular – it’s used by 2.82 million people! 

Again, that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s the best repayment plan for you. But it definitely could be if: 

You’d benefit from having your monthly payments reduced to fit your current income 
You’d like to have a longer repayment period that could end with your student loans being forgiven 
You have federal direct loans 
How does the Income-Based Repayment plan work?

The Income-Based Repayment plan sets your monthly payment at 10% (for new borrowers on or after July 1, 2014) or 15% of your discretionary income (your annual income minus 150% of the poverty guideline for your state and family size). 

Either way, your monthly payments will never be more than what you’d pay under the Standard Repayment Plan. But you will need to submit new information on your income and household every year to have your payments updated accordingly.

Your repayment period under the IBR plan is also much longer. If you’re a new borrower (on or after July 1, 2014), your repayment period is 20 years. If you’re not a new borrower, your repayment period is 25 years.

If you still have student loan debt at the end of the repayment period, the remaining balance is automatically forgiven – leaving you to just pay the tax. 

Income-Contingent Repayment (ICR) Plan

The Income-Contingent Repayment plan is another income-driven repayment plan that’s similar to the IBR, but your monthly payments will be a bit higher. Consequently, this repayment plan is less popular. 

Still, it could be a good fit for you if: 

You’d benefit from having your monthly payments reduced slightly to better fit your current income 
You’d like to have a longer repayment period that could end with your student loans being forgiven 
You have federal direct loans (including parent PLUS loans)
How does the Income-Contingent Repayment plan work? 

The Income-Contingent Repayment plan sets your payment at 20% of your discretionary income OR the amount you would pay on a repayment plan with a fixed payment period of 12 years. Your monthly payment will be whichever amount is lower. 

With the ICR plan, you’ll also need to submit new information on your income and household every year to have your payments updated accordingly.

Your repayment period with an ICR plan is 25 years. And, just like the IBR plan, If you haven’t paid off your loan in 25 years, the remaining balance is forgiven – leaving you to just pay the tax.

Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Repayment Plan

The Pay As You Earn repayment plan is another income-driven repayment plan. And it’s very similar to the Income-Based Repayment plan but could be a better fit for you if:  

You don’t qualify as a new borrower under an IBR plan
You took out your loan on or after Oct. 1, 2007, OR received a disbursement of a direct loan on or after Oct. 1, 2011 (necessary to qualify for PAYE)
You’d benefit from having your monthly payments reduced to fit your current income 
You’d like to have a longer repayment period that could end with your student loans being forgiven 
You have federal direct loans 
How does the PAYE repayment plan work? 

The PAYE repayment plan sets your monthly payment at 10% of your monthly discretionary income, regardless of whether or not you’re a new borrower. Your monthly payments will never be more than what you’d make under the Standard Repayment Plan. 

With the PAYE plan, you’ll also need to submit new information on your income and household every year to have your payments updated accordingly.

Your payment period under the PAYE repayment plan is 20 years. After that, your remaining student loan balance is forgiven – leaving you to just pay the tax. 

Revised Pay As You Earn (REPAYE) Repayment Plan 

The Revised Pay as You Earn Repayment is an updated version of the PAYE plan. Consequently, it’s also quite similar to the IBR plan. But the REPAYE repayment plan could be a better option for you if: 

You don’t qualify as a new borrower under an IBR plan
You don’t qualify for the PAYE plan based on when you took out your student loan or received a disbursement of a direct loan 
You’d benefit from having your monthly payments reduced to fit your current income 
You’d like to have a longer repayment period that could end with your student loans being forgiven 
You have federal direct loans (not including parent PLUS loans)
How does the REPAYE repayment plan work? 

The REPAYE plan sets your monthly payment at 10% of your discretionary monthly income – even if this means your payments would be higher than what you’d pay under the Standard Repayment plan. 

Your repayment period under the REPAYE repayment plan is 20 years if all of your loans were for undergraduate studies. If any of your loans were for graduate studies, then your repayment period jumps to 25 years. 

With the PAYE plan, you’ll also need to submit new information on your income and household every year to have your payments updated accordingly.

Either way, after the repayment period ends your remaining student loan balance is forgiven – leaving you to just pay tax. 

Income-Sensitive Repayment (ISR) Repayment Plan 

The Income-Sensitive Repayment plan is an income-driven repayment plan only available to you if you took out Federal Family Education Loans (FFEL), which were discontinued in 2010. 

So, this plan could only be an option for you if: 

You’ve taken out Federal Family Education Loans (Subsidized FFEL Stafford Loans,

Unsubsidized FFEL Stafford Loans, FFEL PLUS Loans, and/or FFEL Consolidation Loans)

You’d benefit from having your monthly payments reduced to fit your current income 
You’d like to have a longer repayment period that could end with your student loans being forgiven 
How does the Income-Sensitive Repayment plan work? 

If your student loan payments under a different student loan repayment plan exceed 20% of your income, you can apply for Income-Sensitive Repayment to have your payment amount be changed to something more manageable for your annual income. 

The exact amount for your monthly payment is determined by your lender. But it is typically 4% and 25% of your gross income and can change every year depending on your income.

You can only use the ISR plan for a maximum of 5 years and you’ll need to reapply each year, updating information on your income and household. After 5 years, you’ll be automatically switched to another student loan repayment plan. 

Graduated Repayment Plan

The Graduated Repayment Plan is not an income-driven repayment plan. It’s actually quite similar to the Standard Repayment plan – except instead of fixed monthly payments, your monthly payments start low and then increase, gradually, over time. 

The Graduated Repayment plan could be a good option for you if: 

You want to pay off your student loans quickly and pay as little interest as possible 
Your current income doesn’t currently allow you to make high monthly payments – as you would on the Standard Repayment plan – but you expect to be able to make higher payments in at least two years  
How does the Graduated Repayment plan work? 

The Graduated Repayment plan sets your initial payments at a low rate. But every two years your required monthly payments will increase so that you’re still able to pay off the loan within the standard repayment period of 10 years. 

Extended Repayment Plan

Much like the Standard Repayment plan and Graduated Repayment plan, the Extended Repayment plan allows you to make fixed monthly payments to pay off your student loans in a set period of time. But, under this plan, that repayment period is extended. 

The Extended Repayment plan could be a good fit for you if: 

Your income allows you to make fixed monthly payments on your student loans
You need your monthly payments to be lower than what you’d pay under the Standard Repayment plan or Graduated Repayment plan 
You don’t mind your repayment period being 15 years longer than the Standard Repayment plan or Graduated Repayment plan 
How does the Extended Repayment plan work?

The Extended Repayment Plan allows you to make monthly payments that are fixed (same every month) or graduated (increasing over time) – either option ensures you’ll pay off your student loans within a 25 year repayment period. 

Because the repayment period is longer, your monthly payments are generally lower than what you’d pay under the Standard Repayment plan or Graduated Repayment plan.

Private Student Loan Repayment Plans

Unlike federal student loans, private student loans and the terms for repayment aren’t regulated by the government. That means you’ll need to speak directly with your private student lender to know for sure what options you have. In general, though, you’re likely to find the following private student loan repayment plans.  

Immediate Repayment Plan

With an immediate repayment plan, you’ll be making full monthly payments on your loans while you’re still in school. This plan could be a good option for you if: 

You’re currently in college and have the income or financial support to make payments on both your principal balance and accrued interest 
Your goal is to pay off your private student loan by the time you graduate 
Interest-Only Repayment Plan

With an interest-only repayment plan, you’ll make monthly payments that cover the monthly interest being accrued on your loans while you’re still in school. This plan could be a good fit for you if: 

You’re currently in college and have the income or financial support to make monthly payments that prevent your balance from growing due to interest 
Partial Interest Repayment Plan 

With a partial interest repayment plan, you’ll make a fixed monthly payment that covers part of the interest being accrued on your loans while you’re still in school. This plan could be a good fit for you if: 

You’re currently in college and have the income or financial support to make small monthly payments that keep your loan balance from growing too much while in school
Lender-Specific Flexible Repayment Plans 

You probably noticed that the three private student loan repayment plans we just mentioned are for current students. That’s because, generally, once you’ve graduated you’ll need to make monthly payments that cover both your principal and interest during a set repayment period. 

But, if those payments are too high for your current income, try speaking with your private loan lender to see if they have flexible repayment plans. For example, Sallie Mae has a Graduated Repayment Period program. 

Deferment or Forbearance 

If you’re not able to make your private student loan payments, you can also apply for deferment or forbearance.

Deferment is typically granted if you’re going back to school (e.g. graduate school) or enrolling in the military. Forbearance is typically granted if you have extenuating circumstances that make it hard to pay off your student loans (e.g. lost your job). 

Both of these options would postpone any payments you would need to make. But you should only apply for them if you really need to because your student loans will accrue interest while in deferment or forbearance. 

Should You Consolidate Your Student Loans?

Consolidating your student loans could make them easier to manage. How? Because it would combine all of your student loans into one loan that then only requires one monthly payment. It could also help you lower your monthly payments and extend your repayment period. 

But, there are some drawbacks to consolidating student loans. For example, you might end up paying more in interest over time and you’d give up federal loan benefits (e.g. income-driven repayment plans). 

On top of that, it’s a decision you can only make once. So, make sure to carefully consider all of your options before deciding to consolidate! 

What About Student Loan Forgiveness Programs?

These days, student loan forgiveness is a hot topic as the Biden administration attempts to address the $1.6 trillion student loan debt crisis. But, as you probably know by now from Biden’s student loan plan, student loan forgiveness programs and canceling student loan debt aren’t really the same thing.  

Student loan forgiveness programs help people in certain professions by forgiving a portion of the student loan debt. That portion of your debt is usually forgiven in exchange for meeting a list of conditions and requirements, like working in a high need field for a set number of years. 

There are many different student loan forgiveness programs – each with its own application requirements and amount of loan debt that can be forgiven. But here are a few examples: 

Public Service Loan Forgiveness 

This program is for full-time employees of a qualified U.S. federal, state, local, or tribal government or not-for-profit organization. 

It forgives the remaining balance on your direct loans after you have made 120 qualifying monthly payments under a qualifying repayment plan.

Teacher Loan Forgiveness 

This program for teachers who have worked full-time for five complete and consecutive academic years in a low-income school or educational service agency, and meet other qualifications.

It forgives up to $17,500 on your Direct Subsidized and Unsubsidized Loans and your Subsidized and Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans.

Nurse Corps Loan Repayment Program 

This program is for licensed registered nurses, advanced practice registered nurses, or nurse faculty members with qualifying debt. 

To be eligible, you must have received your nursing education from an accredited school of nursing located in a U.S. state or territory and work full-time in an eligible CSF in a high need area or an accredited school of nursing. It forgives up to 85% of unpaid nursing school debt. 

National Defense Student Loan Discharge

This program is for military service members who served in a location that qualifies a military member for hostile-fire or imminent-danger pay. 

If your military service ended before Aug. 14, 2008, this program forgives up to 50% of debt from Federal Perkins Loans, which were discontinued in 2017. If your service began on or after that date, you may have up to 100 percent of your Federal Perkins Loans forgiven.

Attorney Student Loan Repayment Program

This program is for any employee serving in or being hired to serve in an attorney position who has qualifying Federal student loans totaling at least $10,000. To qualify, you must enter a three-year service agreement with the employer. 

The Department of Justice will match your student loan payments up to a maximum of $6,000.

Income-Driven Repayment Plans

As you may have noticed, all of the income-driven repayment plans we discussed earlier (income-based, PAYE, REPAYE, etc.) also offer student loan forgiveness at the end of your repayment period.

How Long Does it Typically Take to Pay Off Student Loans?

The amount of time it will take you to pay off your student loans in full depends on multiple factors. 

For example, the type of loan (e.g. federal vs. private), the starting balance, the interest rate, your repayment plan, and whether or not you’re able to pay more than the minimum monthly payment will all affect how quickly you’re able to pay off your student loan. 

But, there is some data on the average time it takes to pay off student loans: 

In 2013, One Wisconsin Institute conducted a study of 61,762 people and found that it took respondents an average of 21.1 years to pay off their student loan debt.
The Department of Education reports that the average time to pay off student loans depends on the total loan debt. 

Average Time to Pay Off Student Loans, According to the Department of Education


Total Loan Debt 	Repayment Period 
$0-7,500	10 years
$7,500-$10,000	12 years
$10,000-$20,000	15 years 
$20,000-$40,000	20 years 
$40,000-$60,000	25 years 
$60,000 or more 	30 years
5 Tips to Pay Off Your Student Loans Even Faster

If that average repayment period seems a bit too long for you, we get it! Luckily, there are a few things you can do to pay off your student loans faster and become debt-free. 

#1 Pay more than the monthly minimum

Paying more than the monthly minimum on your student loan doesn’t just help you pay down your principal balance faster. It also helps you pay less toward interest over time. Even an additional $50-100/month could make a huge difference, taking years off the time it takes you to pay the loan in full. 

#2 Enroll in auto-pay

Enrolling in auto-pay is a good idea to make sure you never miss a payment. But it’s also a good strategy to pay off your student loans faster. Why? Because you can get a 0.25% reduction of your interest rate on federal direct loans and some private student loans when you sign up for auto-pay. 

#3 Make extra payments whenever you can

On any student loan repayment plan, you’ll only be asked to make 12 student loan payments per year. But if you can fit it into your budget or come into money unexpectedly, make an extra payment. If you decide to do this, just make sure you contact your lender so they know you want the extra payment to go toward your principal balance instead of the next month’s interest. 

#4 Use the debt snowball or the debt avalanche method 

The debt snowball and debt avalanche methods are popular strategies for paying off any kind of debt fast. Both methods require you to keep paying the monthly minimum payments on all of your loans. 

But with the debt snowball method, you’ll put extra focus and money toward paying off the student loan with the smallest balance first. On the other hand, by using the debt avalanche method, you’ll put extra money toward paying off the student loan with the highest interest rate. 

#5 Refinance high-interest student loan debt

Do you have a high student loan balance with a high-interest rate? If so, it may make sense to refinance your student loans. By refinancing, you replace your student loans with a new private loan that has a lower interest rate. This can help you lower your monthly payments in the short-term and pay less overall in the long-term. 

But before you choose this option it’s important to understand that refinancing your student loans involves some risk. For example, if you refinance your federal student loans you’ll no longer have access to income-based repayment plans or student loan forgiveness programs.

Final Thoughts 

Depending on how much you owe, successfully paying off your student loans can take some significant time, financial planning, and persistence. But the moment you get it done and see that remaining balance at $0, you’ll know it was all worth it! We hope what we’ve shared in this blog post can help guide you toward that goal. 

And, if you’d like some help finding and enrolling in the best federal student repayment plan for your current budget and income, don’t forget to sign up for Scholly PayOff!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’re an upperclassman in high school preparing to go to college, you may have heard a teacher or parent reference the “College Board.” But what is the College Board anyway? And why on earth does it matter? 

Well, the College Board is one of the premier hubs for college preparation, providing resources for everything from standardized test prep to college selection (plus, they have their own scholarship fund!).

A Brief Overview of the College Board

According to their website, “The College Board is a mission-driven, not-for-profit organization that connects students to college success and opportunity.”

It was founded in 1900 to help students gain greater access to higher education and it’s now made up of 600+ academic institutions. 

The College Board attempts to level the academic playing field, making excellent education accessible to all students. Every year, it helps over 7 million students seamlessly make the transition from high school to college through testing and academic resources. 

So without further ado, let’s take a look at what the College Board has to offer, and how it can help you increase your college opportunities and success. 

SAT Resources

The College Board is perhaps most well known for the SAT, which stands for the Scholastic Aptitude Test. The SAT is a standardized test commonly used by college admissions boards to assess your academic skills in several areas. Not all colleges require it, but many do. So, if you’re college-bound, there’s a good chance you’ll be taking it. 

Because the College Board develops and administers the SAT, it’s also the best go-to for SAT-related resources. Here’s what you can find on the College Board to help you with all of your SAT needs:

SAT Prep

The College Board’s “Inside the Test” page provides a thorough overview of each section on the SAT, breaking down the different question types and providing valuable strategies.

Specifically, check out their helpful videos on the SAT Reading Test, SAT Writing and Language Test, and  SAT Math Test. Additionally, these SAT study guides for each section of the exam will help you familiarize yourself with the skills tested and the pacing necessary to slay the test.

Another good resource from the College Board is their SAT practice tests. There are plenty of SAT prep courses and materials out there, but we advise going right to the source since the College Board writes the test. If you don’t have the time or energy for full practice tests, check out these SAT sample questions.

And finally, for those of you on the go, here’s our favorite of the College Board’s SAT resources: a daily SAT practice app. It’s free and helps you prep for the SAT quickly and efficiently by providing you one practice question a day. Who doesn’t have time for that?

SAT Fee Waivers

It’s no secret that the SAT can be a bit pricey. The current cost of the SAT is $49.50 without the essay and $64.50. And this isn’t including any fees for additional subject area tests, late fees, change fees, and so on. 

These costs can rack up, especially if you plan to take the SAT more than once to achieve the highest score possible. Fortunately, the College Board offers SAT fee waivers to juniors and seniors who qualify.

If you’re struggling to pay the SAT fees, you may be eligible to receive an SAT fee waiver, and the first thing you should do is talk to your school guidance counselor, who can provide you the necessary paperwork. 

Then, once you have a 12-digit waiver number, you can register to take the SAT free of cost.

Resources for Earning College Credit

One way to save money on college courses is to earn some college credit before you actually attend college. There are a couple of ways the College Board can help you do so.

The AP Program

AP, or “Advanced Placement” courses are college-level courses developed by the College Board that are offered at high schools. Successful completion of an AP course and exam can earn you college credit in that subject area. For example, many colleges allow students to forego taking Composition 101 (a common core, college Freshman course) if you complete AP Literature and Language and pass the test with a 4/5 or higher. 

AP course offerings vary from school to school. But, currently, the College Board offers a wide range of AP courses in art, design, art history, English, music theory, economics, psychology, calculus, statistics, the sciences, and modern languages. 

If you’re on the fence about taking an AP course, it’s always a good idea to do some research on the colleges you’re interested in attending to see if they accept AP credit. And if you’re a freshman or sophomore in high school who is interested in taking AP courses as an upperclassman, then you should plan on taking honors courses now.

Remember that AP courses are challenging, but they can save you a lot of time and money down the line. They can also help you get on the right career path. Check out this super cool AP Connection Tool that allows you to see what majors and careers a specific AP course will prepare you for!

If you want to take an AP exam but are in need of financial assistance, click here to learn more about AP exam fee reductions, or talk to your school guidance counselor.

The CLEP Program

CLEP stands for College Level Examination Program. Like the AP program, CLEP allows you to take and pass exams on certain academic subjects in order to prove your proficiency and earn college credit.

Unlike the AP Program, CLEP doesn’t require you to actually take a course! So if you think you’re pretty strong in a particular subject matter, it can’t hurt to take a CLEP exam and submit it to participating colleges—you may just earn some college credit! 

You can read more about CLEP exams here, but here are some CLEP highlights:

CLEP offers 34 exams on different academic subjects
Anyone can take CLEP (high school students, college students, returning adult students, those in the armed forces, veterans, etc.)
CLEP exams are offered year-round at 2,000+ testing facilities 
CLEP exams are administered on a computer and give you your results instantly upon completion 
Over 2,900 colleges and universities in the United States accept CLEP exams for college credit 

So if a certain subject (or subjects!) is your strong suit, consider taking a CLEP exam to earn college credit for the knowledge and skills you already possess. Way to save time, money, and energy by putting your best foot forward!

College Planning Resources

Preparing for college can feel overwhelming. How do you know which major to choose? Should you really know which career is the right one for you now? These questions can be hard to answer at the start of your journey.

Never fear: The College Board offers a wealth of resources to help you prepare and plan for your college journey and beyond. And just an FYI: you’ll need to create an account to get the most out of these tools. But it’s totally free!

The BigFuture™ College Search Database

This super sweet college database helps you search and find the right college just for you! You can search for the perfect fit based on the following criteria:

Test Scores and Selectivity 
Type of School
Location 
Campus & Housing
Majors & Learning Environment
Sports & Activities 
Academic Credit
Paying (Financial Aid, Tuition Costs, etc.)
Additional Support Programs
Diversity 

Within each of these categories, you can set even tighter parameters. For example, you can search for colleges based on your SAT score, your desire to have a car (or not on campus), your extracurricular activities, and so on.

With 3,690 colleges in their database, you’re bound to discover plenty of college options—including ones you’ve probably never even heard of before!

The BigFuture™ Majors Search

Similar to the College Search Database, the Majors Search allows you to search for keywords related to your personal strengths and interests, providing you various college majors that may be a good fit for you.

Career Finder Database

In coordination with Roadtrip Nation, the College Board has created an awesome Career Finder Database that allows you to search and find a TON of viable careers and career paths based on your skills and interests.

What we love about this database is that you’ll likely discover careers you weren’t even aware of yet! And, Career Finder also provides useful information about the national job growth of each profession, so you can get a sense of which jobs will be most competitive, most potentially lucrative, and so on.

Financial Resources
College Application Fee Waivers

If you’re applying for multiple colleges, the application fees can really add up. However, if you take the SAT (and use a fee waiver for it, as discussed earlier), then you’re in luck.

There are currently over 2,000 colleges that offer application fee waivers and this list is updated daily by the College Board.

You can learn more about college application fee waivers through this college directory and through these college application fee waiver FAQs.

Scholarships

The College Board recently founded the Opportunity Scholarships program. And we couldn’t be more excited about it!

Starting with the class of 2020, the College Board has been giving away merit scholarships to students who demonstrate academic promise and improvement through using College Board tools.

You can read more about eligibility and how to apply for a College Board Opportunity Scholarship but the gist is that if you take certain steps through the College Board that reflect your academic dedication, you’ll be entered into monthly drawings to win money for your efforts!

You can win scholarships for the following:

Building your college list ($500)
Completing SAT practice ($500)
Exploring scholarships ($500)
Strengthening your college list ($500)
Completing your FAFSA ($500)
Applying to colleges ($500)

AND, if you do all of the above, you’ll be entered to win a $40,000 scholarship! You can read more on all of your Opportunity Scholarship FAQs here.

The CSS Financial Aid Profile

You can now apply for non-federal financial aid using a CSS Profile, which stands for the College Scholarship Search Profile. This application will help you search and apply in one place for financial aid opportunities such as scholarships and grants. You can read more about the CSS process here.

There is a $25 fee to use the CSS profile. But the College Board also issues some CSS fee waivers to eligible students.

For most colleges, completing the CSS Profile is optional. But, for others, it’s a mandatory component of your financial aid application. So, make sure to check with your college’s financial aid department.

Keep in mind, however, that you will still need to file a FAFSA (Free Application for Federal Student Aid), which is how you’ll apply for and receive financial aid from the government. Check out our ultimate guide to completing your FAFSA!

Looking for More Ways to Plan and Pay For College? Scholly’s Got Your Back!

Use Scholly Search, our hyper-personalized, scholarship-matching engine to find thousands of scholarship opportunities tailored just to you. And check out our expert tips for winning scholarships to increase your chances of winning big.

We’ve already helped students win over $100 million in free money for college. Why not be next?!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
The Ronald McDonald House Charities (RMHC) division of the McDonald’s Corporation has awarded over $48 million in college scholarships to students since 1985. 

And, this upcoming year, you could become one of those students! But finding and applying for the right McDonald’s Scholarship does require some research and work.

We want to help! That’s why in this post, we’re going to look at: 

The differences between the 4 RMHC McDonald’s Scholarship programs 
The eligibility requirements for each of the McDonald’s Scholarships
How much McDonald’s Scholarships are worth and if they’re renewable 
How to apply for the McDonald’s Scholarships, including detailed descriptions of what you’ll need for each section of the application  
The McDonald’s Scholarships application timeline
5 tips to increase your chances of winning one of the McDonald’s Scholarships 

One note before we jump in: If you’d like to apply to more than just one of the Ronald McDonald House Charities Scholarship Programs, Scholly Search is the #1 scholarship app in the world and will instantly match you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits. Give it a try today with a 100% free trial!

Now, let’s jump right into an overview and the eligibility requirements of each of the McDonald’s Scholarships! 

What are the RMHC McDonald’s Scholarships? And Who’s Eligible to Apply? 

Currently, there are 4 main RMHC McDonald’s Scholarship programs you may be eligible to apply for. But you can only apply to win one of these scholarships. 

Let’s now look at each one, along with their eligibility requirements, so you know exactly which one you should apply for. 

RMHC Scholarship 

You can apply to win this scholarship as long as you meet the following eligibility requirements: 

Be a current high school senior who is eligible to attend a two or four-year college university, or vocational/technical school
Be a legal U.S. resident
Be less than 21 years of age
Have at least a 2.7 GPA 
Reside within the geographic boundaries of a participating RMHC chapter
RMHC/African American Future Achievers

You can apply for one of McDonald’s African American Future Achievers scholarships if you have at least one parent of African American or Black Caribbean heritage. 

Apart from that, the same eligibility requirements apply: 

Be a current high school senior who is eligible to attend a two or four-year college university, or vocational/technical school
Be a legal U.S. resident
Be less than 21 years of age
Have at least a 2.7 GPA 
Reside within the geographic boundaries of a participating RMHC chapter
RMHC/ASIA (Asian Students Increasing Achievement)

You can apply for one of McDonald’s ASIA scholarships if you have at least one parent of Asian-Pacific heritage. 

Apart from that, the same eligibility requirements apply: 

Be a current high school senior who is eligible to attend a two or four-year college university, or vocational/technical school
Be a legal U.S. resident
Be less than 21 years of age
Have at least a 2.7 GPA 
Reside within the geographic boundaries of a participating RMHC chapter
RMHC/HACER (Hispanic American Commitment to Educational Resources) Scholarship

You can apply for one of McDonald’s HACER Scholarships if you have at least one parent of Hispanic heritage. But unlike the other McDonald’s Scholarships, there are two types of HACER Scholarships: local and national.  

For the local HACER Scholarships, the eligibility requirements are the same as the ones above: 

Be a current high school senior who is eligible to attend a two or four-year college university, or vocational/technical school
Be a legal U.S. resident
Be less than 21 years of age
Have at least a 2.7 GPA 
Reside within the geographic boundaries of a participating RMHC chapter

For the HACER National Scholarships, the requirements are mostly the same as the local scholarship. But there are a few important differences (in bold): 

Be a current high school senior who is eligible to attend a two or four-year college university (vocational/technical schools are not included)
Be a legal U.S. resident
Be less than 21 years old
Have at least a 2.8 GPA
Disclose other scholarship programs that you’ve applied for
How Much Are McDonald’s Scholarships Worth? 

McDonald’s Scholarships are typically worth around $1000 each. And you can use that money to pay for your tuition, fees, books, supplies, and equipment required for your courses at accredited, nonprofit two or four-year colleges/universities or vocational/technical schools in the United States.

But, while most McDonald’s Scholarships are worth $1000, some are worth much more. For example, this upcoming year, there will be 30 McDonald’s® HACER® National Scholarships, ranging from $5,000 to $100,000. 

The exact amount for the other McDonald Scholarships will depend on your local RMHC chapter. So, check there for the most up-to-date information. 

To find your local RMHC chapter, go to Google and search for “[local city] Ronald McDonald’s House Charity scholarships”. Then find the chapter’s webpage on scholarships. If you can’t find any info on scholarships, send an email to request more information.   

Are McDonald’s Scholarships Renewable? 

Typically not. Most of the McDonald’s Scholarships are non-renewable, meaning they’re only good for one year. However, there are a few exceptions. 

Depending on the guidelines created by your local RMCH chapter, you may be able to renew your McDonald’s Scholarship by submitting a renewal application. This is another thing you’ll want to check on when looking through your local RMCH chapter website or when requesting more information.

Do You Need to Be a McDonald’s Employee to Apply for the Scholarships? 

You do not! The McDonald’s Scholarships are available to all students who fit the eligibility requirements we listed above. 

But if you do happen to be a McDonald’s employee, you may also consider applying for their tuition assistance program called the Archways to Opportunity. 

How to Apply for the McDonald’s Scholarships

Alright, time for the good stuff! Let’s get into how you apply to win one of the McDonald’s Scholarships.

Let’s start with a complete list of what information and materials you’ll need for the application: 

High school transcript 
Official SAT/ACT scores
FAFSA Student Aid Report
Information about your financial situation 
Information about your first-choice college/university 
Information about your high school and academic record
Information about your involvement in extracurricular activities and any awards or honors you’ve received 
Detailed information about your involvement in community service, volunteer activities, and work/internship experience 
Answers to 4-5 short personal statement essay questions  
1-2 letters of recommendation 
Video statement (optional and only for the HACER National Scholarship)

That looks like a lot, huh? Don’t worry! The application is actually quite simple. But to make sure you’re well prepared to submit a stellar application, let’s look at each of those materials in a bit more detail.

High school transcript

You can submit either an official or unofficial transcript. But if you send an unofficial transcript, you’ll need to convert it to one of the acceptable file types (.pdf, .tif, .png, .jpeg, .jpg, .bmp and .xps). Also, make sure it shows all of your grades throughout high school (not just a single term grade report) and includes your name. 

Note: If you’re applying for the HACER National Scholarship, you only need to send in your high school transcripts if you’re selected as a semi-finalist. 

SAT/ACT scores

You’ll need to upload a score report from the SAT/ACT to complete your application. But the score report doesn’t need to be sent directly from College Board or the ACT. Just upload a copy of the official report you received to the McDonald’s Scholarship application portal. 

FAFSA Student Aid Report

After completing the FAFSA, you’ll receive a Student Aid Report (SAR) that shows you information on your eligibility for federal student aid. You’ll need to upload all 5 pages of your SAR, with your Estimated Family Contribution (EFC) visible, to your application for one of the McDonald’s Scholarships. You’ll also need your SAR to fill in some of the financial information (see next section). 

You should gain access to your SAR within two weeks of submitting your FAFSA. But if you haven’t filled out the FAFSA yet and need some guidance, check out How to Apply for FAFSA. 

Note: If you’re applying for the National HACER scholarship, you only need to send in your FAFSA Student Aid Report if you’re selected as a semi-finalist. 

Information about your financial situation

One of the criteria used to select winners of the McDonald’s Scholarships is financial need. So, you’ll be asked to share information on: 

Estimated Family Contribution (EFC) found on your FAFSA SAR
Number of members in your household
Number of dependents (e.g. your siblings) attending college in fall 2021
Total cash, checking, savings, and cash value of stocks (exclude 401k, IRA) (you’re not required to answer this one)
Whether you live with at least one of your parents
Whether your parent(s)/legal guardian(s) were employed last year (2020)
The marital status of your parent(s) or guardian(s)
Whether your parent(s)/legal guardian(s) receive any Federal or State Aid

If you have any special circumstances regarding your family’s financial situation that you’d like to be taken into account, you can also write a short statement (300 words max). 

Information about your college/university

If you win a McDonald’s Scholarship, the money will be sent directly to whichever college/university you attend. If you’re not sure which school that will be yet, don’t worry. You can just enter the information about your first-choice (where you most hope to attend). If needed, you can also change this school later within the application portal. 

Either way, the application will ask you to input the following information about that school: 

State where the school is located 
Name of the school
You’re expected degree program (associates, bachelors, certificate, masters, doctoral)
The type of academic institution (certificate, four-year college/university, two-year college/university, vocational/technical school)
Your intended major 
Your anticipated graduation date

Note: For some reason, the application gives you options that go against the eligibility requirements. Remember you can only apply for McDonald’s Scholarships if you’re planning to enroll in associates or bachelors degree programs at a two-year college/university, four-year college university, or a vocational/technical school (vocational/technical schools are NOT eligible for the HACER National Scholarship).

Information about your high school and academic record

The application will ask you the following information about your high school:

State and city where it’s located 
School name
School address
Your graduation date
Your principal’s name, email address, and telephone number
Your academic counselor’s name, email address, and telephone number 
Whether or not your school ranks students 
If your GPA is weighted or unweighted
Your current GPA on a 4.0 scale 
Your ACT composite score OR your SAT scores for Reading/Writing and Math
The number of Honors, AP, IB, or Dual Enrollment classes you’ve taken 

Note: Although you’ll be asked about your GPA, class enrollment history, and test scores in this section, you’ll still need to upload a complete transcript and SAT/ACT scores to complete your application. 

Information about your involvement in clubs/extracurricular activities and any awards or honors you’ve received

Are you active in school clubs? Do you participate in any extracurricular activities? Have you won any awards? If so, you’ll need to list that on your application and include information on: 

The names of the club/extracurricular activities, number of years involved, and the highest positions held (e.g. Volleyball Team, 3 years, Varsity Captain)
The name of the awards, level (school, city, state, national, etc.), and number of years achieved (e.g. Honor Roll, School, 4 years) 
Detailed information about your involvement in community service, volunteer activities, and work/internship experience

Community involvement is also one of the main selection criteria used to pick recipients of the McDonald’s Scholarships. 

So, you’ll be asked to share the following information about community service and volunteer activities in a section of the application titled “Resume”: 

A detailed description of the service activity and your role
Club/Organization name
Average hours per week of service
Number of weeks served per year
Number of years involved
When you participated in the activity (during high school/secondary school) 
If you’re still participating in the activity 

For any work/internship experience, you’ll be asked to share the: 

Employer name
Position 
Start month and year
End month and year
Average number of hours worked per week  

Tip: You can save yourself some time when inputting information about your community service and volunteer activities. How? By using the same information you included when talking about volunteering and community services in the activities section of your college applications. For a refresher on best practices, check out this helpful guide on how to write about your activities on college applications. 

Answers to 4-5 short personal statement essay questions

No matter which McDonald’s Scholarship you apply for, you’ll need to write short essays (100-300 words max; varies per question and program) to answer the following questions: 

What has most influenced your professional or career aspirations for the future?
Describe an influential person in your life, and how he/she has helped change your view of yourself and the world. You may use examples from your family life, community service, or extracurricular activities.
Some believe that a person of character demonstrates the following six qualities: trustworthiness, respect, responsibility, fairness, caring, and citizenship. Pick one of these qualities, describe the value of this quality, and, most importantly, explain how you have exemplified this trait.
Describe a time when you were in a leadership or responsibility position. What obstacles did you have to overcome? How did you overcome those obstacles to obtain your goal?

If you’re applying for the McDonald’s HACER National Scholarship, you’ll also need to write one additional short essay to answer these questions: 

What career path are you planning to pursue? What do you want to be when you grow up, and why?

Note: The word count for these short essays varies between scholarship programs. For one program (e.g. RMHC Scholarship), you can answer the first question listed here using up to 150 words. But for another program (e.g. HACER National Scholarship), you can answer that question using only up to 100 words. So, be sure to check the word limit listed in the application portal before you begin writing.  

Tip: If you’ve written similar essays for your college applications, you can reuse those essays in your scholarship application! Just make sure to edit them so they fit the scholarship essay prompt and word count. 

1-2 letters of recommendation

You’ll need to submit 1-2  recommendation letters from teachers, coaches, mentors, etc. Ideally, these people can speak to your strengths in academics, community service, and potential to thrive in college. 

Your teacher or mentor will need to submit the letter of recommendation via a link provided from the application portal. But make sure to let them know at least 2 weeks in advance before you send them the link. That way, they’ll know when to expect it and be able to schedule sufficient time to write the letter.  

Tip: You’ll likely have already asked for recommendations from 2 teachers or mentors when completing your college applications. So, if you want, you can save time and make things easier. How? By asking those same teachers or mentors to write the recommendations for your McDonald’s Scholarship application. 

Video statement (optional and only for the HACER National Scholarship)

If you want, you can include a short video essay explaining why you deserve one of the HACER National Scholarships. When making your video, follow these guidelines: 

No more than 2 minutes in length
Uploaded to YouTube or another free video service (mailed video submissions on DVDs or any other physical format are not accepted) 
If the video is password protected or requires a sign in to view, you must include the password in your application
The video must be available through the end of the application cycle (see below) 

For inspiration, check out this awesome video submission from a previous applicant: 

 

Note: You will not be penalized if you choose not to include a video statement. 

McDonald’s Scholarships Application Timeline

So, you now know how to apply for a McDonald’s Scholarship. But when do you need to actually get started on the application? When is the deadline? And when would you find out if you’ve won the scholarship money? Let’s see now! 

Application Timeline for the Local RMHC McDonald’s Scholarships

October 1: The application for the McDonald’s Scholarships opens 

January 18: The deadline to submit your application 

January 25: The last day for your teacher, coach, mentor, etc. to submit your letter of recommendation 

April 30: The winners of the McDonald’s Scholarships are announced 

August: The scholarship funds are disbursed to the recipient’s colleges/universities 

Note: These dates may vary among the different RMHC chapters. So, double-check to be sure of the application timeline for applicants in your geographic area.  

Application Timeline for the McDonald’s HACER National Scholarship

If you’re applying for the McDonald’s HACER National Scholarship, the application timeline has a few differences from the one above.  

October 5: The application for the McDonald’s HACER National Scholarship opens 

February 3: The deadline to submit your application

February 10: The last day for your teacher, mentor, etc. to submit your recommendation letter 

February 16: Semi-finalists are announced and gain access to the semi-finalist application

March 3: The deadline for semi-finalists to complete the semi-finalist application 

May 7: The winners of the national McDonald’s HACER National Scholarships are announced 

July/August: The scholarship funds are disbursed to the recipient’s colleges/universities 

5 More Tips to Increase Your Chances of Winning the McDonalds Scholarship

We’ve already shared a few tips in the “How to Apply for a McDonald’s Scholarship” section of this blog post. But here are a few more to give your application an extra boost! 

Write Memorable Personal Statement Essays

Put yourself in the shoes of the McDonald’s Scholarship selection committees. Every year, they have to review thousands of applications. And they have to read even more essays from students like you answering the 4-5 personal statement prompts. So, make sure your essays stand out! 

The best way to do that is to make sure your essay has a hook introduction, uses descriptive language, and does more showing than telling. We know this is easier said than done. So, check out these helpful guides on scholarship essays and personal statements for more in-depth advice. Also, make sure to proofread and edit your essays before submitting your application! 

Be Strategic When Asking for Letters of Recommendation 

Yes, you should ask for your letters of recommendation early. But is that all you can do to ensure it’s a letter that helps increase your chances of winning the scholarship? Nope! You can also do things like: 

Write your request for the letter of recommendation as a formal email to your teacher, mentor, coach, etc. that includes: the name of the scholarship, a link to where they can find more information about the scholarship, the deadline, the core selection criteria, and (if you think they’ll need it) this guide on how to write a letter of recommendation for a scholarship
In the email, also let them know what you enjoyed most about their class, activity, etc. (e.g. a specific lesson, discussion, or assignment that you learned a lot from), some achievements outside of their class (e.g. extracurricular awards), and a bit about your aspirations for college and life
Then, follow up by speaking to them in person about why you deserve this scholarship and how it will help you pursue higher education 
Next, follow up by email 1-2 weeks later to make sure they’re able to submit the letter on time
Finally, send a thank you letter to the people who wrote your letters once everything is complete! 
Submit Your FAFSA Early 

The official deadline for FAFSA isn’t until the end of June. But you’ll need the FAFSA Student Aid Report (SAR) to complete your application for the McDonald’s Scholarships by the deadline. And, it also takes around two weeks to get your SAR after submitting the FAFSA. 

So, don’t wait until the last minute! Complete the FAFSA as soon as you can! Also, remember, if you need guidance on filling out the FAFSA correctly, you can find all the information you need by reading How to Apply for FAFSA.

Work Hard to Achieve a High GPA

The minimum GPA for the McDonald’s Scholarships is a 2.7 (2.8 for the HACER National Scholarship). But, with academic performance being one of the main selection criteria for the scholarship, you can increase your chances by aiming to achieve an even higher GPA throughout high school. 

So, if there is still time before you’re set to apply, make sure to study hard and get help from teachers or tutors if you’re struggling in one or more of your classes. You can also consider some of the strategies listed in this helpful article on ways to boost your GPA. 

Volunteer and Participate in Community Service

Most colleges and scholarship committees look for students who volunteer and participate in community service. Why? Because it shows them that you are committed to doing good in the world. And that’s something they want to reward you for so that you can do even more good in the future!

So, if you still have time before you’re set to submit your McDonald’s Scholarship application, make sure to be an active member in helping to build up your community. For ideas on ways you can volunteer your service, check out this awesome list of 100+ community service project ideas.  

Where to Find More Scholarships 

Winning one of the McDonald’s scholarships could be a great way to help cover the costs of your college education. But it’s not your only option for scholarships. There are many more scholarships you can apply for and win! 

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the Burger King Scholarship and Taco Bell Live Más Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Winning the lottery to pay for college is unlikely. But winning a scholarship funded by lottery ticket sales is 100% possible thanks to the Florida Bright Futures Scholarship Program, which is available to all Florida residents! 

The program includes four unique scholarship types that Florida residents can apply for and win, covering up to 100% of tuition and fees at Florida colleges and universities.  

And in this post, we want to make sure you have all the information you need to make one of those scholarships yours! That’s why we’re going to look at: 

How much Bright Futures scholarships are worth 
The eligibility requirements for each of the scholarships
A few exceptions to the eligibility requirements 
How to apply for Bright Futures scholarships
The application timeline, including the open date and deadline
3 tips to increase your chances of winning a Bright Futures scholarship

But before we dive into those topics, let’s start with a quick overview of the Florida Bright Futures Scholarship Program! 

What is the Florida Bright Futures Scholarship Program?

The Florida Bright Futures Scholarship Program started in 1997 as part of an initiative to retain talented, high achieving students in the state of Florida. As we mentioned before, it’s funded by ticket sales for the Florida Lottery. 

To date, the Florida Bright Futures Scholarship Program has helped more than 725,000 Florida students attend a postsecondary institution! 

The Bright Futures scholarship awards include: 

Florida Academic Scholars Award (FAS) – For students with an A average (3.5+ GPA)
Florida Medallion Scholars Award (FMS) – For  students with a B average (3.0+ GPA)
Florida Gold Seal Vocational Scholars Award (GSV) – For students pursuing a technical degree or certificate program (to be explained in a moment)
Florida Gold Seal CAPE Scholars Award (GSC) – For students pursuing a technical degree or certificate program before transitioning to a Bachelor of Science or Bachelor of Applied Science degree program 

How are these 4 Bright Futures scholarship awards different from one another? Well, for starters, they’re not all worth the same amount. And some can only be used to fund specific degree programs. Let’s take a look now at each so you can see what we mean! 

How are the Bright Futures Scholarships Different? How Much is Each Award Worth? 

Here’s a quick overview of what each of the Bright Futures scholarships has to offer. You’ll see that not all of them will apply to your postsecondary study plans. But all of them are quite generous! 

Florida Academic Scholars (FAS)

Are you a student with a 3.5 GPA or above and top scores on the SAT/ACT (29/1330+)? Then the Florida Academic Scholars (FAS) could be for you. 

It’s the most competitive of the Bright Futures scholarships. And it covers 100% of tuition and applicable fees and $300 for both fall and spring semesters for additional educational expenses at public colleges or a comparable amount at non-public colleges. As a FAS award recipient, you could also apply to receive an award that covers tuition and fees for summer sessions.

Florida Medallion Scholars (FMS)

If you’re a good student, but don’t quite have the grades and test scores required for the FAS award, look into the Florida Medallion Scholars (FMS) award. This is the second most competitive of the Bright Futures scholarships and goes to students who have at least a 3.0 GPA and good test scores on the SAT/ACT (25/1210+). 

It covers 75% of tuition and applicable fees at public colleges. Similar to the FAS award, you’d receive a comparable amount if attending a non-public college. You can also receive an award for summer sessions to cover tuition and applicable fees.

Florida Gold Seal Vocational Scholars (GSV) and Florida Gold Seal CAPE Scholars (GSC)

For both the FAS and FMS award, you can choose to study whatever you’d like. But if you’re interested in technical degree programs (e.g. an associate’s degree to become a Registered Medical Technician, Veterinary Assistant, Pharmacy Technician, etc.), check out the Florida Gold Seal Vocational Scholars (GSV) and Florida Gold Seal CAPE Scholars (GSC). They offer less scholarship funding but are also less competitive than the FAS and FMS awards. 

Both the GSV and GSC awards cover up to 72 credit hours for the following degree programs offered by community colleges:

Associate of Science (AS)
Associate of Applied Science (AAS)
College Credit Certificate (CCC)
Post-Secondary Adult Vocational (PSAV)

Either award can also cover up to 60 credit hours of an Applied Technology Diploma (ATD). 

(If you’re not sure what subjects you can study under those programs, don’t worry! Click the links above to see what’s offered at the College of Central Florida and Florida Gateway College as examples.) 

The Florida Gold Seal Vocational Scholars (GSV) is for you if you’re planning to enroll in a technical career education (AS or AAS) or certificate program (CCC or PSAV). 

The Florida Gold Seal CAPE Scholars (GSC) award is for you if you are pursuing an associate’s degree (AS or AAS) through a Florida Career and Professional Education Act (CAPE) industry certification program. As a GSC scholar, once you get the associate’s degree, you may also receive an additional award for a maximum of 60 credit hours toward a Bachelor of Science or Bachelor of Applied Science degree.

How long do Bright Futures scholarships last? Are they renewable? 

Bright Futures scholarships renew automatically each year for up to 5 years! That means you don’t need to submit any more applications after the first one as long as you achieve and maintain the required GPA and required credit hours. 

If needed, winners of the FAS and FMS awards can also apply to extend the award past 5 years to finish a degree program that requires more than 120 hours.  

Bright Futures Scholarship Program Eligibility Requirements

So, by now you know that Bright Futures scholarships are only for students who are Florida residents. But beyond that, what are the other requirements? 

Well, to be honest, there are quite a lot. There’s even a whole chapter of the Bright Futures Student Handbook dedicated just to the eligibility requirements! 

But that’s mostly because the requirements differ depending on which of the scholarship awards you hope to win. And that’s good news. Because it means you don’t need to focus on all of the requirements — just the ones that apply to you. 

Plus, it’s likely you’ll only need to care about the eligibility requirements of one of these two sets:

1) The Florida Academic Scholars (FAS) and Florida Medallion Scholars (FMS)

2) The Gold Seal Vocational Scholars (GSV) and Gold Seal CAPE Scholars (GSC)

You’ll see why we say that soon. But before we get into that, there are general eligibility requirements that apply to all four of the Bright Futures scholarships. So, let’s start there!

General Requirements for ALL Bright Futures Scholarships 

To apply for any of the Bright Futures scholarships, you must: 

Be a Florida resident and a U.S. citizen or eligible noncitizen, as determined by the student’s postsecondary institution.
Complete the Florida Financial Aid Application (FFAA) no later than August 31 after high school graduation.
Earn a standard Florida high school diploma, or its equivalent, from a Florida public high school or a registered Florida Department of Education (FDOE) private high school; or complete a home education program
Not have been found guilty of, or pled nolo contendere to, a felony charge, unless you have been granted clemency by the Governor and Cabinet sitting as the Executive Office of Clemency.
Be accepted by, and enroll in a degree or certificate program at, an eligible Florida public or independent postsecondary institution.
Enroll in at least six non-remedial semester credit hours (or the equivalent in quarter or clock hours) per term.
If not funded in the academic year immediately following high school graduation, apply within five years of high school graduation to have your award reinstated.

Now that you know the general requirements, let’s get into the unique requirements for each of the Bright Futures scholarships. 

Unique Requirements for the Florida Academic Scholars (FAS) and/or Florida Medallion Scholars (FMS) 

To qualify for the Florida Academic Scholars (FAS) award or the Florida Medallion Scholars (FMS) award, you must: 

Meet all the requirements listed in the prior general requirements section
Complete the required high school coursework (check the table below)
Achieve the required minimum high school grade point average (GPA) (check the table below) 
Achieve the required minimum score on either the ACT® or SAT® college entrance exam (check the table below)
Complete the required number of service hours (check the table below)
Eligibility Requirements for Florida Academic Scholars (FAS) and Florida Medallion Scholars (FMS)

Source

Other Ways to Qualify

If you have demonstrated academic merit through a recognition program, like the AICE curriculum or the IB curriculum, you may still be eligible to apply for the FAS and FMS Bright Futures scholarship awards.  

Merit Recognition Programs that Qualify for Florida Academic Scholars (FAS) and Florida Medallion Scholars (FMS) Eligibility

Source

AICE Curriculum
Complete a minimum of 14 AICE credits identified by the Cambridge Assessment International Education (Cambridge International) in the Diploma Core and three academic areas as follows:
AICE Diploma Core – AICE Global Perspectives & Research AS level (Two Credits required)
Group 1 – Mathematics and Sciences (Two Credits required)
Group 2 – Languages (Two Credits required)
Group 3 – Arts and Humanities (Two Credits required)
Group 4 – Interdisciplinary Skills (Optional – Four Credits maximum)
Six additional credits required in any combination from the above four groups
IB Curriculum
Complete a minimum of 10 credits identified by the International Baccalaureate Organization:
Two credits each in three of the following areas and one credit each in the remaining three areas: Language Arts, World Language, Social Studies, Science, Mathematics and Arts/Electives. Each of these credits must be an IB or AP course. Pre-IB courses do not meet IB curriculum requirements.
One credit in Theory of Knowledge
Complete the Creativity, Action, Service (CAS) requirement
Complete an extended essay
Unique Requirements for the Gold Seal Vocational Scholars (GSV) 

To qualify for the Florida Gold Seal Vocational Scholars (GSV) award, you must:

Meet all the requirements listed in the prior general requirements section
Achieve the required weighted minimum 3.0 GPA in non-elective high school courses
Take at least 3 full credits in a single Career and Technical Education program
Achieve the required minimum 3.5 unweighted GPA in the career education courses
Achieve the required minimum score on the ACT, SAT or Florida Postsecondary Education Readiness Test (P.E.R.T.) exams (see table below)
Complete 30 service hours during high school and by high school graduation
Standardized Testing Eligibility Requirements for Gold Seals Vocational Scholars (GSV)

Source

Unique Requirements for the Gold Seal CAPE Scholars (GSC) 

To qualify for the Gold Seal CAPE Scholars (GSC) award, you must: 

Meet all the requirements listed in the prior general requirements section
Earn a minimum of five postsecondary credit hours through CAPE industry certification courses that are taken for college credit
Complete 30 service hours by high school graduation
Exceptions to the Eligibility Requirements

There are also quite a few exceptions to the eligibility requirements mentioned above. Check to see if one of the following exceptions put you back in the pool of qualified candidates for the Florida Futures Scholarship Program. 

Students Participating in a Home Education (HE) Program

If you’re participating in a HE program, you must be registered with the district for the current

and prior academic year. If you are not registered with the district home education office for the current and prior academic year but have the required transcripts and test scores, you may be able to apply as a Florida GED Diploma recipient.

To qualify as a Florida home-educated student, you must:

Meet the General Requirements for Bright Futures 
Submit a timely Florida Financial Aid Application 
Earn required minimum standardized test scores (depends on the award; see charts above)
Complete the minimum number of service hours (30-100 hours depending on the award)

As a home-educated student, you do not need to provide a student transcript. The test score and service hour requirements are the same as traditional students.

General Educational Development (GED) Students

To be eligible for the scholarship as a GED student, you must meet the high school coursework and grade point average requirements before taking the GED exam. Your eligibility for a scholarship will be determined in the academic year in which you earn your GED. 

To apply as a GED student, you’re required to submit the following: 

Florida Financial Aid Application 
Exam scores for the ACT, SAT, or P.E.R.T.
High school transcripts
GED certificate
Documentation of your service hours
Out-of-State (OOS) Students

Although generally, a Bright Futures Scholarship application requires a standard Florida high school diploma, there are exceptions. 

You may still be eligible with a high school diploma from a non-Florida school if you: 

Meet the General Requirements for the Florida Bright Futures Scholarship Program (see above)
Have at least one parent who is a Florida resident and is: A) serving active duty in the military or B) on public service assignment away from Florida during your last year of high school
Submit a completed FFAA online during the last year in high school (no later than August 31)
Submit official high school transcript(s)
Submit ACT/SAT scores
Submit documentation for out-of-state assignment
Submit Proof of Dependency
Submit documentation of your service hours
Mid-Year Graduates 

For the Bright Futures Scholarship Program, you’re considered a mid-year graduate if you’re: 

Graduating between September 1-January 31 of the academic year
Seeking funding for the spring academic term following graduation

If you graduate early but do not seek funding until a subsequent academic year, you are not considered a mid-year graduate for Bright Futures. 

But if you do qualify as a mid-year graduate and want to apply for a Bright Futures scholarship, you must: 

Submit the FFAA by December 31 of your senior year of high school (no exceptions to this deadline)
Meet the general scholarship requirements for the academic year of your graduation
How to Apply for a Bright Futures Scholarship

We know all of the different eligibility requirements for the Bright Futures scholarships can seem like a lot. But, luckily, applying isn’t so bad! 

All you have to do to apply for a Bright Futures scholarship is: 

Submit the Florida Financial Aid Application  

The application gives the Florida Department of Education (FDOE) permission to evaluate your high school transcript(s) for eligibility for a Florida Bright Futures Scholarship. If you need help filling out the Florida Financial Aid Application, check out the Florida Department of Education’s helpful reference guide. 

Submit official high school transcripts

Florida’s public high schools automatically send your transcripts to the FDOE for Bright Futures evaluations. If you don’t attend a public high school, you’ll need to make sure official electronic copies of your transcript(s) get sent to OSFA.Transcripts@fldoe.org  

Submit standardized test scores 

The easiest way to submit your scores is to request the ACT/SAT to send your official score report to one of Florida’s 12 state universities. You can do this when you register for the tests. You can also take the test as many times as you like up until June 30 of your senior year as a regular graduate or until January 31 if you qualify as a mid-year graduate.

Submit documentation of your service hours 

The agencies where you earned the service hours must provide documentation on the agency letterhead of the number of hours and dates of service completed. The hours must be documented in writing, and signed by you, your parent or guardian, and a representative of the organization. For more details on the official guidelines, look here. 

Unfortunately, there’s not any clear information online that says when and how you submit this document. But we recommend monitoring your account after submitting your application for official instructions. You can also try checking with your guidance counselor. 

Submit any required supporting documents

For example, if you’re applying as a GED student, you must also submit a copy of your GED certificate. You’ll find the other documents you may need to submit listed in the section on exceptions to the eligibility requirements above. The information on when and how to submit these documents is, unfortunately, also not clearly stated online. 

Bright Futures Scholarship Application Timeline 

Now that you know how to apply for the Bright Futures scholarships, let’s make sure you know how to apply on time! 

Here are the important dates and deadlines for the Bright Futures Scholarship Program: 

October 1: The Florida Financial Aid Application opens

January 31: Last day to submit transcripts and test scores for Early Evaluation period deadline 

March: Students who apply for Early Evaluation begin receiving notice of their Bright Futures scholarships eligibility determination 

June 30: All ACT®/SAT®/P.E.R.T. tests must be taken by this date  

July: Students who apply for the Final Evaluation period begin receiving notice of their Bright Futures scholarships eligibility determination 

August 31: Last day to submit the FFAA and meet the Final Evaluation deadline 

3 Tips to Increase Your Chances of Winning a Bright Futures Scholarship

As we’re sure you can agree, the eligibility requirements for the Bright Futures scholarships are numerous. But most of them center around your academics, test scores, and service hours. So, these 3 tips are to help you specifically improve in those areas.

Aim to Achieve a High GPA

Your GPA doesn’t just determine whether you’re eligible for Bright Futures scholarships. It’s also important for college applications. So, do your best to keep a strong track record of grades by staying on top of your homework and assignments, taking good notes, making a sustainable study schedule, and getting help from a teacher or tutor when you need it. 

Start Preparing Early for SAT/ACT

Your scores on the SAT/ACT are also important for both your Bright Futures Scholarship application and your college applications. To really give these tests your best shot, start preparing for them as early as possible. According to Khan Academy, you should take a diagnostic test to gauge your taking abilities and develop the appropriate study plan at least 6 months before your first test date. 

Begin Community Service During Freshman Year 

Each of the Bright Futures scholarships requires a minimum number of service hours, ranging from 30 to 100 hours. Don’t wait to try to do this right before the deadline! You’re better off starting your hours in your freshman year of high school and gradually building them up over time. Just make sure you’re following the volunteer service guidelines set by the Bright Futures Scholarship Program.  

Where to Find More Scholarships 

We hope this post has helped you get a clear understanding of how to apply for and win one of the Florida Bright Futures scholarships. But we also hope you don’t stop there. Because there are many more scholarships just like this one that can help you pay for college!

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips and strategies on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the Taco Bell Live Más Scholarship and various Full-Ride Scholarships.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
The Burger King Scholars program has awarded more than $44 million in scholarships to help more than 39,000 students since being founded in 2000. Even better, you can easily start and finish the application today.

But before you get started, we want to help make sure you have all of the information you need to increase your chances of winning. That’s why in this post, we’re going to cover: 

How much Burger King scholarships are worth 
Who is eligible to apply for Burger King scholarships
What documents you need to complete the application 
Important dates like when the application opens and closes
Tips for putting together a competitive application

One note before we jump in: If you’d like to apply to more than just the Burger King Scholars Program, Scholly Search is the #1 scholarship app in the world and will instantly match you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits. Give it a try today with a 100% free trial!

Let’s jump in with a quick overview of the Burger King scholarships! 

What is the Burger King Scholarship? 

A Burger King scholarship refers to any of the scholarships awarded by the Burger King Scholars program. 

To honor the Burger King brand co-founder, James W. McLamore, the Burger King scholarships are for students who demonstrate integrity, high standards, entrepreneurial spirit, good citizenship, and a passion for their education. 

As a winner of a Burger King scholarship, you can use your award money to pay for tuition, fees, and required books at accredited, two- or four-year colleges/universities in the United States, Canada, or Puerto Rico.

How Much are Burger King Scholarships Worth?

The various Burger King scholarships are worth different amounts, ranging from $1,000 to $50,000. The majority of recipients will receive $1,000 scholarships, but each year the Burger King Scholars program also awards: 

Up to 3 James W. McLamore WHOPPER® scholarships of $50,000 granted to the most highly qualified students demonstrating leadership, substantial work experience and financial need
Up to 12 Regional awards of $5,000 granted to the two most qualified employees in each of six regions from the pool of eligible and complete applicants
One (1) Steven M. Lewis Foundation award of $5,000 granted to the most qualified U.S. Restaurants employee from the pool of eligible and submitted applicants aligned to U.S. Restaurants
Up to four (4) Bravokilo, Inc./Bravotampa, LLC awards of $5,000 granted to the most qualified Bravokilo, Inc./Bravotampa, LLC employees from the pool of eligible and submitted applicants aligned to Bravokilo, Inc. or Bravotampa, LLC
One (1) Ghai Management award of $5,000 granted to the most qualified Ghai Management employee from the pool of eligible and submitted applicants aligned to Ghai Management
One (1) Carrols LLC award of $5,000 granted to the most qualified Carrols LLC employee from the pool of eligible and submitted applicants aligned to Carrols LLC
Do You Need to Work at Burger King to Apply?   

Nope! Although some of the Burger King scholarships we just mentioned are granted only to employees, not all of them are. 

So, no, you don’t need to be a Burger King employee! The $1,000 and $50,000 scholarships are available to all high school seniors who meet the eligibility requirements. 

In fact, there are two different application tracks to choose from when applying for a Burger King scholarship: 

BURGER KING® General Track – Available to all high school seniors who are pursuing an undergraduate degree at a U.S. accredited college/university and meet the eligibility requirements. 
BURGER KING® Employee-Based Track – Available to employees, spouses or domestic partners of employees, and dependent children of employees who are pursuing an undergraduate or graduate degree at a U.S. accredited college/university and meet the eligibility requirements. 

If you do happen to be a Burger King employee, then you’ll want to definitely make sure you apply! As you can see in the video below, the Burger King Scholars program really values hard-working employees and wants to see them succeed in accessing higher education!

Burger King Scholarship Eligibility Requirements 

Let’s turn now to look at the eligibility requirements for both the General Track and the Employee-Based Track. 

BURGER KING® General Track Eligibility Requirements 

To apply through the general application track, you must: 

Be living in the United States, Canada or Puerto Rico
Be a graduating high school senior (U.S. and Puerto Rico), graduating from grade 12 (Canada) or graduating from homeschool education in the U.S., Puerto Rico or Canada
Have a cumulative high school grade point average of 2.5 or higher on a 4.0 scale, or the equivalent
Plan to enroll full-time, without interruption, for the entire upcoming academic year at an accredited two- or four-year college, university or vocational-technical school in the U.S., Canada or Puerto Rico
BURGER KING® Employee-Based Track Eligibility Requirements 

To apply through the employee-based track, you must:

Be living in the United States, Canada or Puerto Rico
Be an employee* of Burger King Corporation or a participating BURGER KING® franchisee (Franchisees)
OR
Be a spouse (unless legally separated) or domestic partner** of an employee* of Burger King Corporation or Franchisees
OR
Be a dependent child*** of an employee* of Burger King Corporation or Franchisees (Designated Employer)
AND
Be a graduating high school senior (U.S. and Puerto Rico) or have attained a GED, graduating from grade 12 (Canada), graduating from homeschool education in the U.S., Puerto Rico or Canada or current college undergraduates or graduate level students in the U.S., Puerto Rico or Canada
Have a cumulative grade point average of 2.5 or higher on a 4.0 scale or the equivalent
Plan to enroll**** for the upcoming academic year at an accredited two or four-year college, university, or vocational-technical school in the U.S., Canada or Puerto Rico

* Employees must be active on Designated Employer’s payroll for at least 6 months as of the application deadline date and employed at the time awards are first announced.

** Domestic partner is defined as (i) Employee’s sole Domestic Partner and intend to remain so indefinitely; (ii) Employee and Domestic Partner reside together in the same principal residence and intend to reside together indefinitely; (iii) Employee and Domestic Partner are both at least eighteen (18) years old and mentally competent to consent to a contract; (iv) Employee and Domestic Partner are not related by blood in a close enough manner that would bar marriage under applicable law in effect where they reside; and (v) Employee and Domestic Partner are not legally married to anyone else and are not involved in any other Domestic Partnership.

*** Dependent children are defined as biological, step- or legally adopted children living in the employee’s household or primarily supported by the employee.

**** Employees and their spouse/domestic partner may be enrolled part-time or full-time. Children of employees must be enrolled full-time, without interruption, for the entire academic year.

Additional Eligibility Requirements For the James W. McLamore WHOPPER® Scholarship

If you want to be considered for the $50,000 James W. McLamore WHOPPER® Scholarship, there are a few additional requirements. You can apply through the General Track or the Employee-Based Track, but you must also:  

Be a citizen of the United States or Canada
Be a senior at a high school or home school in the United States, Canada, or Puerto Rico
Be applying as a full-time freshman to a four-year accredited, college or university that is located in the United States or Canada and is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code
Have a cumulative unweighted grade point average (GPA) of at least 3.3
Have a minimum ACT Composite score of 25 or a minimum combined SAT score of 1220
Demonstrate an active leadership role in community service, athletics, and/or similar co-curricular activity (such as student government, team sports, fraternal life, etc)
Demonstrate substantial work experience and financial need
Not be an officer, director, spouses/domestic partners or child of an officer or director of the BURGER KING℠ McLamore Foundation
How to Apply for a Burger King Scholarship

Applying for a Burger King Scholarship is a piece of cake as long as you meet the eligibility requirements we just mentioned and have all of the required documents.

Since the Burger King Scholarship Program is officially administered by Scholarship America®, you’ll need to create an account there to access the official application. Once your account is registered, you can begin completing the application in English, Spanish, or French. 

The application will require you to upload: 

A list of your work experiences and involvement in school and community activities
A current (official or unofficial) transcript of grades (Unofficial or online transcripts must display your name, school name, grades and credit hours for each course and term the course was taken)
BURGER KING® employee information if your application is to be affiliated with an employee
If applicable, your family’s financial information. A copy of your parents’ most recent tax form filed with the IRS or Revenue Canada may be helpful to look at when filling out that section of the application

Then once you’ve uploaded everything, remember to submit the application. Scholarship America® will email you afterward to acknowledge they’ve received your application. 

And that’s it! If you watched the video we shared earlier, you heard previous applicants say it only took them about 20 minutes to complete the application! 

You can also get a full view of what the official application looks like and how to complete it, from start to finish, by watching this helpful Burger King scholarship application tutorial: 

Application Timeline for the Burger King Scholarships

Alright, so by now you know whether you’re eligible and how to apply for a Burger King scholarship. But when should you take action so you can make that scholarship money yours?  

Let’s look at the important dates for the Burger King scholarships, including when the application opens, the deadline, and the decision date. 

October 15: The application for the Burger King scholarships opens

December 31: The application for the Burger King scholarships closes 

May: Scholarship America® will announce the winners of the Burger King scholarships and request additional information 

August: Winners of the Burger King scholarships will receive scholarship checks by mail. Winners must then notify their college or university about the award and deliver the scholarship check to the school as soon as possible 

One more thing! 

Although the application deadline is December 31, we’d encourage you to apply way before then. Why? Because if 50,000 applications are received before December 31, the application is no longer be available.

Tips to Increase Your Chances of Winning a Burger King Scholarship 

To win one of the Burger King scholarships, you’ll need an application that stands out among all the other hopeful applicants. So, here are some tips to increase your chances of winning!

Gather Your Application Materials in Advance 

The application for the Burger King Scholarships doesn’t require things like essays or recommendation letters. But you should plan ahead by gathering the required application materials well before the application even opens. Why? Because, as the saying goes, the early bird gets the worm! You only have a shot at winning a Burger King scholarship if you’re one of the first 50,000 applicants. So, try to be one of the first to apply! 

Achieve a Solid Academic Record and Test Scores  

Scholarship America® makes half of its decision on whether to award you a Burger King scholarship based on your academic record. As you saw in the eligibility requirements, the minimum cumulative GPA you need for the General Track and Employee-Based Track is a 2.5 on a 4.0 scale. And if you want to be considered for the $50,000 James W. McLamore WHOPPER® Scholarship, you’ll need to achieve a 3.3 and at least a minimum composite score of 25 on the ACT or 1220 on the SAT. So, make sure to study hard for all of your classes and exams! 

Participate in Extracurricular Activities, Community Service and Work Experience 

Scholarship America® makes the other half of the decision based on the strength of your participation in extracurricular activities, community service, and work experience. Undoubtedly, the most competitive applicants will have participated in all three. So, make sure to consistently participate in these types of activities throughout your time in high school. It won’t just benefit your application for Burger King scholarships. Extracurricular activities, community service, and work experience will also benefit all of your college applications, personal statements, and scholarship essays! 

Where to Find More Scholarships 

The Burger King Scholarships are amazing and absolutely worth applying to so you can reduce the costs of your college education. But don’t stop there. There are many other scholarships you can apply for and win! 

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the Coca-Cola Scholarship and various Full-Ride Scholarships.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Taco Bell’s Live Más Scholarship isn’t your traditional scholarship. 

That’s because unlike a lot of popular scholarships that award money to students based on grades or athletic ability, the Taco Bell Foundation awards Live Más Scholarships worth up to $25,000 each to hundreds of students every year based on their passion and drive!

If that sounds like you, keep reading. Because, in this post, you’re going to learn everything you need to know to win one of the Live Más Scholarships and get closer to that not-so-secret goal of paying as close to $0 as possible for your college education! 

Let’s dive right in with a quick overview of the Live Más Scholarship.

What is the Live Más Scholarship? 

The Taco Bell Live Más Scholarship is a passion-based scholarship for students aged 16-24. 

The Taco Bell Foundation awards this scholarship to students who are what they call “Passioneers” — young innovators, creators, and dreamers who want to share and pursue their passion through higher education.

Is the Live Más Scholarship Only for Taco Bell Employees? 

Nope! You don’t need to be a Taco Bell employee to apply for the Live Más Scholarship. They are available for both Non-Taco Bell Employees and Taco Bell Employees.

In fact, the Taco Bell Foundation offers three different programs to apply for and win Live Más Scholarships:

The Live Más Scholarship Program (For Non-Taco Bell Employees)
The Live Más Scholarship for Restaurant Employees Program (For Taco Bell Employees Only)
The Live Más Scholarship Renewal Program (For Previous Winners of a Live Más Scholarship)

You only have to compete with students who apply for the Live Más Scholarship under the same program as you. The Taco Bell Foundation chooses approximately 100 winners from each program.

How Much is the Live Más Scholarship Worth? 

For each of the three application tracks listed above, the Taco Bell Foundation awards up to $1 million worth of Live Más Scholarships in varying amounts:

Up to $5,000 per recipient for up to 30 recipients
Up to $10,000 per recipient for up to 60 recipients
Up to $25,000 per recipient for up to 10 recipients

Remember that you only have to compete with students applying under the same Live Más Scholarship Program as you. So, there could be up to 10 Non-Taco Bell employees who win up to $25,000, 10 Taco Bell employees who win up to $25,000, and 10 renewal applicants who win up to $25,000.

However, according to the Taco Bell Foundation, the number of recipients for each of the Live Más Scholarships isn’t set in stone. There could be more or fewer winners for each scholarship bracket depending on a variety of factors.

Eligibility Requirements for the Live Más Scholarship

According to the Taco Bell Foundation, you must fit the following requirements to be eligible to apply for a Live Más Scholarship as a new applicant: 

Be a legal resident of the 50 United States and the District of Columbia (“D.C.”) who is at least 16 years of age and no older than 24 years of age, located in the United States or D.C.  
On-track to apply for, pending receipt of a high school diploma or G.E.D. equivalent, or are currently enrolled in an accredited post-high school/post-secondary educational program (including accredited two- and four-year colleges, universities, vocational, technical, and trade schools).  
Have not previously received a Live Más Scholarship. 
Obtain and submit written permission from a parent or legal guardian if you’re considered a minor in your state of residence 

For the Live Más Scholarship for Restaurant Employees Program, the eligibility requirements are the same as the general eligibility criteria above but also require you to: 

Be an employee of Taco Bell of America, LLC, Taco Bell Corp. or any of its franchisees or licensees, with a minimum of three months of continuous employment with such entity in a restaurant position (Team Member, Trainer, Shift Leader, Assistant General Manager, or Restaurant General Manager, etc..) as of the last day of the program period.
Work with the Taco Bell Foundation’s Scholarship Management Company throughout the application and award process.
Identify the specific post-secondary education program, college, or certificate/degree option you want to get into, or for which you need funds. You may be looking to enroll or already enrolled in this secondary educational program.

And, finally, to be eligible for the Live Más Scholarship Renewal Program, you must fit the following requirements: 

Be a legal resident of the 50 United States and the District of Columbia (“D.C.”) and be located in the United States or D.C.
Previously have won a Live Más Scholarship through the Live Más Scholarship Program or the Live Más Scholarship Program for Taco Bell Restaurant Employees
Currently enrolled in an accredited post-high school/post-secondary educational program located in the United States or D.C. (including accredited two- and four-year colleges, universities, vocational-technical, and trade schools) and in good academic standing
Have used or substantially depleted (75% or more) of awarded amounts from a previous Live Más Scholarship prior to the Selection Period
Be willing to work with the Taco Bell Foundation’s Scholarship Management Company throughout the application and award process. 
How to Apply for the Live Más Scholarship

Now, because the Live Más Scholarship is different from traditional scholarships, you must have expected that the application would be a bit untraditional as well, right? If so, you’re correct! 

To apply for a Live Más Scholarship, you can ditch the standard scholarship essay. Instead, you’ll be asked to submit a video, ranging anywhere from 30 seconds to 2 minutes.

A video on what? Well, that’s mostly up to you as long in one way or another it addresses these questions: 

What post-secondary education program, college or certificate/degree program are you attending?
What impact will following your passion have on your local community or the world?
How do you plan to achieve your passion through your educational goals?
What is your dream college, school, or next step in your education?

Just make sure you don’t sit in front of your camera and answer those questions one after another. That’s not what they’re looking for. They want to see some creativity in how you talk about yourself and your passion. (We’ll look at some inspirational examples from past winners soon!)

Once you’ve created your video, visit the Taco Bell Foundation website during the application period and click “Apply.” Then, follow the on-screen instructions to fill out your information and submit your video.

When is the application period? Let’s take a look at that now along with other important dates like the application deadline and winner announcements. 

Live Más Scholarship Application Timeline 

Based on previous application cycles, here are the important dates for the Live Más Scholarship: 

November: The Live Más Scholarship application opens at the beginning of the month 

January: The application closes toward the middle of the month 

January – April: The Taco Bell Foundation reviews all of the applications and selects the winners 

April: 100 winners from each of the 3 application tracks are announced

August-September: The Live Más Scholarship funds are disbursed 

6 Tips to Win the Live Más Scholarship

In 2019, the Executive Director of the Taco Bell Foundation shared that over 13,000 students applied for a Live Más Scholarship! With that level of competition, it’s all the more important to make sure your video application stands out. 

So, here are 6 tips you can follow that are based on the official application terms and conditions as well as a few video submissions from previous winners of the Live Más Scholarship! 

#1 Don’t Just Talk About Your Passion, Show Your Passion

One of the coolest things about the Live Más Scholarship is that you get to create a visual snapshot of something you’re passionate about. So, don’t just sit in front of your camera and talk about your passion. Show the Taco Bell Foundation the moments where your passion brings you the most joy!

Take a look at what we mean by viewing this video submission from 2018 Live Más Scholarship winner, Alexandra Poret: 

What makes that video so great is that Alexandra brings us into her world. From her robotics competitions in school to meeting former president Obama to getting accepted to college, we get a glimpse into Alexandra’s personality, aspirations and, as she says, how she Lives Más!

#2 Share How College Will Help You Pursue Your Passion

It’s also important to remember why you’re making the video — to win a scholarship to help pay for college! So, make sure the Taco Bell Foundation knows how you plan to continue to pursue your passion in college. 

Notice, in the video just shared, Alexandra mentions how she’s discovered that her passion for robotics can be used for something more than just fun. It can also be used to create innovations in the field of bioengineering, which she wants to learn more about in college. 

Your connection between your passion and higher education may take a different form. But the important thing is that you use your video to help the Taco Bell Foundation see how college will help you to take what you can do with your passion to the next level. 

#3 Communicate How Your Passion is Related to Your Long-Term Goals 

When you’re passionate about something, it tends to stick with you for the long-term while also shaping your hopes and dreams. The Taco Bell Foundation wants you to show them that in your video! 

Here’s a video from 2019 Live Más Scholarship winner, Rafael Bitanga, that’s a good example of what we mean: 

In the video, Rafael discusses how his passion for food and culinary arts inspires his long-term goals to bring people together to discuss important issues over food, confront global food insecurity, and help improve the lives of his family members in the Philippines. 

#4 Talk about What Originally Inspired Your Passion 

As you may have also noticed in the previous video, it’s important to give the Taco Bell Foundation context on what originally inspired your passion. In Rafael’s video, we get to see how his family’s immigrant background has inspired his future goals. 

You can do this not only through words but by sharing photos or video footage from your life. Of course, you may even come up with other ways to show your inspiration. What’s most important is that you demonstrate that your passion has been built over time and will continue to grow as you begin the next stage of your life in college!

#5 Tell Your Story in an Emotionally Inspiring and Authentic Way 

You most likely won’t be the only person applying for the Live Más Scholarship with your passion. For example, many students may be passionate about film or the arts. But what will always be unique is your perspective. So, use that perspective to communicate your passion in a way that’s authentic to you! 

Here’s a video application from 2019 Live Más Scholarship winner, Daisy Cornejo, that does just that: 

What’s great about this video submission is that Daisy didn’t just talk about why she likes filmmaking. Instead, she uses her talent to create a narrative that incorporates scenes of herself and others. By doing so, she evokes emotion and makes her unique background and goals memorable.  

#6 Show How Pursuing Your Passion Will Help You Make An Impact on the World 

Remember, the Taco Bell Foundation wants to award the Live Más Scholarships to students who are young innovators, creators, and dreamers who want to share and pursue their passion. In other words, they want to award students who have the potential to use their passion to make an impact on the world. So, make sure you spend some time in your video making that point clear! 

All of the videos we just shared spend the last few moments of their video talking about the impact they hope to have on the world. In the last video, Daisy closes her video by talking about how she wants to pursue degrees in Film and Chicano/a Studies to “educate, uplift and inspire communities”.

Where to Find More Scholarships

We hope this post has you feeling inspired to share your passion and apply for the Live Más Scholarship. But we also hope you don’t stop there. Because there are many more scholarships just like this one that can help you pay for college!

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips and strategies on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the Coca-Cola Scholarship and the NY Excelsior Scholarship.

Good luck!

 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’ve ever dreamt of winning a full-ride scholarship and going to college for free, you’re not alone! It’s the ideal scenario that can take away any stress regarding tricky student loan applications or troublesome post-graduation student loan debt. 

But you don’t just want to dream about full-ride scholarships. You want to win a full-ride scholarship! 

But how exactly do you do that? What kind of students win full-ride scholarships? Where do you even go to find full-ride scholarships? And, if you don’t win a full-ride scholarship, is it still possible to go to college for free? 

All good questions. And at Scholly, it’s our mission to simplify the process of finding and winning scholarships because we want you to win them to help pay for college too! That’s why in this post, we’re going to answer each of those questions and more so that you know everything you need to know about full-ride scholarships. We’ll also share 12 full-ride scholarships you can apply for! 

But before we jump in, one quick note: If you want to be matched with new scholarships every month, from full-ride scholarships to small no essay scholarships, start your free Scholly Search trial today. Our #1 rated scholarship app will instantly match you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits. Get started with a 100% free trial!

Now, let’s get started by first talking about what “full-ride scholarship” actually means. 

What is a Full-Ride Scholarship? 

A full-ride scholarship is a scholarship that covers a college’s full cost of attendance. That means, in addition to covering your tuition, a full-ride scholarship also covers your room and board, books, and student fees. 

Some full-ride scholarships even offer extra perks like funds for a new laptop, study abroad, and leadership programs.  

When looking for full-ride scholarships, you may also come across full-tuition scholarships. But it’s important to know that those two things are not the same. Unlike full-ride scholarships, full-tuition scholarships only cover the cost of tuition. 

Both types of scholarships, full-ride and full-tuition, are obviously amazing at helping you pay for college. But full-ride scholarships are the absolute best for ensuring you pay $0 for college! 

How Common are Full-Ride Scholarships? 

Because full-ride scholarships are such a good deal, you probably won’t be surprised to find out they’re pretty rare. In fact, fewer than 20,000 students per year win full-ride scholarships — less than 1% of each year’s incoming college freshmen.

But does that mean putting together applications for full-ride scholarships isn’t worth your time? Not at all!

For one, full-ride scholarship applications generally ask for the same materials as other scholarship applications. So, if you’re already applying for scholarships (you should be!), you can likely “recycle” the materials that take up the most time to complete (e.g. scholarship essays). 

And, depending on when you’re reading this, you may still have time to plan ahead on everything you’ll need to do to put together a really strong application for one or more full-ride scholarships! 

We’ll share some application and preparation tips soon. But first, let’s take a look at where you can find full-ride scholarships. 

Where to Look for Full-Ride Scholarships

It’s not always easy to find scholarships, let alone rare full-ride scholarships, on the internet. That’s because scholarship information is sometimes buried on old websites that still haven’t been updated to be found when you put something like “full ride scholarships” into Google. 

Frustrating? You bet. But don’t worry! 

At Scholly, our goal is to help simplify the way you find scholarships. For example, with Scholly Search (available on iOS, Android, and your web browser) you can gain access to a large database of scholarships worth millions-and-millions of dollars! Scholly Search matches you with all of the scholarships you qualify for so that you don’t miss out on any chances to win free money to pay for college. 

Let’s look now at a few examples of full-ride scholarships you might find that are offered by colleges, private organizations, and the government. And remember, this is just a sample. Scholly Search has hundreds of full ride scholarships available at any given time. 

6 Full-Ride Scholarships from Universities 
Nancy Susan Reynolds Scholarship

Quick Facts: This full-ride scholarship covers the annual cost of tuition, room, and board, plus $3,400 for personal expenses for four years of undergraduate study at Wake Forest University. As a Reynolds Scholar, you can also apply for up to $5,000 for a research, study, or travel project during each of the three summers between the first and senior years.

You’ll have the highest chance of getting this scholarship if you excel in academics and on standardized tests, take challenging courses, and have demonstrated leadership in extracurriculars. Up to five Reynolds Scholars are chosen annually.

Jefferson Scholarship

Quick Facts: This full-ride scholarship covers tuition, fees, books, supplies, room, board, and personal expenses for four years of undergraduate study at the University of Virginia. As a recipient, you also get to take advantage of supplemental enrichment experiences, which include foreign travel studies, career counseling, the Institute for Leadership and Citizenship, and more. 

To win this scholarship, you must first be nominated for the regional competition by your school during your senior year, be selected as a finalist, and then participate in the Jefferson Scholarship Selection Event in late March. In 2019-2020, 32 Jefferson Scholars were chosen from a pool of more than 2,000 nominees.

Morehead-Cain Scholars

Quick Facts: This full-ride scholarship provides four years of full funding (including summers) for undergraduates studying at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. As a Morehead-Cain Scholar, you can also receive funding for an international gap year and study abroad as well as apply for their Discovery Fund grants of up to $8,000 to fund a personal project.

This scholarship is available to students across the world. But to win, you must first be nominated by your school, an affiliate program, or apply directly. In particular, the Morehead-Cain Foundation states they seek to award students who are “motivated, courageous, and inquisitive leaders interested in embracing new and unknown experiences and impacting— positively and profoundly—the people and pursuits that define their lives.” The number of students awarded the Morehead-Cain Scholarship varies per year. 

Trustee Scholarship 

Quick Facts: This full-ride scholarship covers full undergraduate tuition plus mandatory undergraduate student fees for four years at Boston University. 

To be considered for the Trustee Scholarship, you must have exceptional academic credentials, demonstrate that you’re well-rounded through leadership and extracurriculars, submit your application to study at Boston University by December 1, and write a 600-word essay. Around 20 students per year win the Trustee Scholarship. 

Stephen Joel Trachtenberg Scholarship

Quick Facts: This full-ride scholarship covers tuition, room and board, books, and fees for four years of undergraduate study at the George Washington University. 

To apply, you must be a D.C. high school senior. The Stephen Joel Trachtenberg Scholarship Program also selects recipients based on their academic record, including GPA, course of study, teacher recommendations, leadership qualities, community service, and other extracurricular activities and achievements. You’re also required to apply to GWU by the January 5 deadline, be nominated by your high school counselor, submit the FAFSA and CSS Profile, write an essay, and participate in an evaluative interview. 10 students won the Stephen Joel Trachtenberg Scholarship in 2020. 

Torch Scholars Program 

Quick Facts: This full-ride scholarship covers tuition, room and board, books, and fees for four years of undergraduate study at Northeastern University. As a recipient, you’d also get to participate in the program’s seven-week Summer Immersion Program, peer and professional mentoring, and more. 

To be eligible, you must be a first-generation student from a diverse background, demonstrate perseverance in achieving academically in spite of adversity, show leadership in school and extracurricular activities, and have previously enrolled in college prep classes. You must also be nominated by an adult (non-family member) and submit your application to Northeastern, the FAFSA and CSS Profile by January 1, write three essays, and participate in several rounds of interviews. 10 students win a Torch Scholarship per year. 

4 Full-Ride Scholarships from Private Organizations 
Gates Scholarship

Quick Facts: Awarded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Gates Scholarship covers the full cost of attendance, including tuition, room and board, books, transportation, and other personal costs. The scholarship is renewable for up to five years of full-time undergraduate study at any US accredited, not-for-profit, private or public college or university.

To apply, you must be a high school senior from an ethnic minority background, be Pell Grant eligible, and have at least a cumulative weighted 3.3 GPA of 3.3 on a 4.0 scale. The ideal recipient will have also placed in the top 10% of their class, demonstrated leadership, and developed exceptional personal success skills (e.g., emotional maturity, motivation, perseverance, etc.). Each year, 300 students win a Gates Scholarship. 

(Learn more about the Gates Scholarship by checking out this guide on How to Win the Gates Scholarship!)

The Robertson Scholars Leadership Program

Quick Facts: The Robertson Scholars Leadership Program provides eight semesters of full tuition, room and board, and most mandatory fees for students who choose to study at Duke University or UNC-Chapel Hill. Recipients of this scholarship also have access to generous funding for up to three summer experiences, funding for conferences throughout the academic year, and two semesters of study abroad.

To apply, you must submit ACT or SAT scores, 2 recommendation letters, an application to study at Duke University and/or UNC-Chapel Hill during the same year of your scholarship application. The program seeks to award students who have demonstrated outstanding potential to become great leaders in college and beyond.

Stamps Scholarships

Quick Facts: The Strive Foundation has partnered with 36 US colleges and universities to offer students multi-year Stamps Scholarships that range from $5,400 to $75,000 per year. Stamps Scholars may also receive additional funding for things like study abroad, academic conferences, and leadership training. The Strive Foundation and partner schools evenly share the costs of the awards.

As long as you apply to one of the 36 partner schools and meet the criteria and eligibility, you will be automatically considered for a Stamps Scholarship. However, each school has its own deadlines and may have additional steps to submit a complete application. The Strive Foundation and partner schools seek to award students who demonstrate academic merit, strong leadership potential, and exceptional character. Financial need is not required to become a Stamps Scholar. 

Coolidge Scholarship

Quick Facts: The Coolidge Scholarship is full-ride scholarship that covers tuition, room, board, and expenses for four years of undergraduate study at any accredited college or university in the U.S. Students from all backgrounds and academic backgrounds are encouraged to apply for this non-partisan, need-blind scholarship program.

To apply, you must be a high school junior with a strong academic record, complete an online application, write several essays, read The Autobiography of Calvin Coolidge, get two letters of recommendation, and submit test scores. It’s also preferred for you to have an interest in public policy, community service, and the values of President Coolidge. Around two to three applicants are expected to win the Coolidge Scholarship per year.

2 Full-Ride Scholarships from the Government 
USDA/1890 National Scholars Program

Quick Facts: The USDA/1890 National Scholars Program is a partnership between USDA and the 1890 historically black land-grant colleges and universities. The program provides full tuition, fees, books, room and board to students pursuing degrees in agriculture, food, natural resource sciences, or related academic disciplines at one of the nineteen 1890 historically black land-grant colleges and universities. When the student has completed the academic and summer work requirements of the scholarship, USDA may at its discretion convert the student to a permanent employee without further competition.

To apply, you must be a U.S. citizen, have a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or better (on a 4.0 scale), demonstrate leadership and community service, and submit an official transcript and signed application. In addition to high school seniors, rising college sophomores and juniors are also eligible. 

U.S. Air Force ROTC Scholarships

Quick Facts: The Type 1 U.S. Air Force ROTC Scholarship provides full funding for college tuition and authorized fees at any public or private institution with an Air Force ROTC detachment. Recipients also receive a monthly living expense stipend, an annual book stipend, and reimbursement of travel expenses used to go from their home to the Air Force ROTC detachment’s college.

To apply, you must be a U.S. citizen, pass a Department of Defense Medical Examination Review Board medical exam, complete a physical fitness test and have a cumulative unweighted GPA of 3.0 or higher and an SAT composite of 1240 or ACT composite of 26. If awarded a scholarship, you must accept and sign an agreement with the United States Air Force.

(Learn more about the U.S. Air Force ROTC Scholarship by checking out this guide on How to Win ROTC Scholarships!)

7 Tips for Winning Full-Ride Scholarships 

Because of how rare they are, winning full-ride scholarships isn’t easy. But with the right game plan, you can set yourself for a higher chance of success! Here are 7 tips to help you do just that: 

#1 Start preparing early 

Winning a full-ride scholarship takes a lot of preparation. So, you’ll be more likely to win one if you start preparing early in high school to build a strong academic and extracurricular profile. Later in high school, it’s also a good idea to start working on your scholarship applications as soon as they’re released. 

#2 Take challenging courses 

Full-ride scholarship foundations want to award students who not only have strong grades but who have also challenged themselves with a rigorous course load. Strive to take Advanced Placement, Honors, IB, and College Prep courses in subjects you can excel in. You may also be able to earn college credits while in high school by taking courses at a local community college or university. 

#3 Develop leadership skills

Leadership is one of the most sought after qualities in full-ride scholarship applicants. So, strive to achieve leadership positions (captain, student president, club founder, etc.) and noteworthy accomplishments in your extracurricular activities, community service projects, student government, jobs, and internships.

#4 Commit to community service

Full-ride scholarship foundations also like to see applicants who commit to giving back to their communities. The quality or your community service is more important than just stacking up a bunch of community service hours. It’s best if you pick one or two causes you really care about and commit to service over the entire course of your time in high school — even when it’s not part of your graduation requirements. 

#5 Build relationships with your teachers and guidance counselor 

Many full-ride scholarships require that you’re first nominated by someone like a teacher or guidance counselor. So, you’ll want to make sure you’ve built a good relationship with them so that they know you and your goals for higher education well. Most likely, they will be happy to support you! Some scholarship applications will also require you to get one or more recommendation letters.

#6 Hone in on what makes you unique  

With so many strong applicants applying for the limited number of full-ride scholarships, you’ll need to make sure you stand out. Try to make sure your selection of academic courses, extracurricular activities, and community service are a reflection of your unique interests and values. Also, know that there are many scholarships for students with unique traits and characteristics! 

#7 Submit a spectacular scholarship application

All of the previous tips will lead you to this last one. But make sure that you present everything in the best way on your scholarship applications by making sure you follow all of the application instructions, complete any “optional” work, learn how to write a killer scholarship essay, and meticulously proofread your essays and application materials.

(For more tips, check out 15 Expert Tips on How to Apply for Scholarships!)

How to Go to College for Free Even If You Don’t Get a Full-Ride Scholarship

There is no doubt that full-ride scholarships are amazing. But they aren’t the only way to go to college for free. 

If, in addition to full-ride scholarships, you also apply to many other scholarships of various amounts, you might be able to create your own set of “full-ride” scholarships! Let us show you what we mean. 

Let’s say, for example, you win one scholarship worth $20,000 per year and another one worth $15,000 per year. With the average cost to attend an out-of-state public college currently being $22,577, those scholarships pretty much equal a “full-ride”! 

To give another example, let’s say you win several scholarships: one for $15,000, two for $5,000, one for $1,000, and two more for $500. Well, that’s $27,000 and also enough for a “full-ride” to an out-of-state public college! 

So, even if you don’t win a full-ride scholarship, that dream you had of avoiding student loans and debt with scholarship money that covers everything is still possible! You just need to cast a wide net by applying for as many scholarships as you can. 

With that goal in mind, make sure to check out Scholly Search to help make the process of finding all those scholarships as easy as can be! 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
The Excelsior Scholarship is the first of its kind. In 2017, the State of New York made history with the scholarship by starting the country’s first statewide tuition-free college program. 

But what do you have to do to win the Excelsior Scholarship? That’s what we’re going to look at in this post! 

And to make sure you have all of the information you need, we’re also going to look at: 

How the Excelsior Scholarship Program works, including the scholarship award amount and what it covers
The list of Excelsior Scholarship eligible schools 
The eligibility requirements for the Excelsior Scholarship 
How to apply for the Excelsior Scholarship 
The application timeline 
How the COVID-19 Pandemic May Affect the Excelsior Scholarship

One last note before we jump in: If you’d like to win more than the Excelsior Scholarship maximum ($5,500), Scholly Search is the #1 scholarship app in the world and will instantly match you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits. Give it a try today with a 100% free trial!

What is the Excelsior Scholarship Program?

The Excelsior Scholarship is a scholarship for New York residents who attend an undergraduate degree program at one of the CUNY or SUNY colleges. As a recipient of the Excelsior Scholarship, you can receive up to $5,500 per year of full-time study. 

Notice that we said “up to $5,500”. Not everyone receives that exact amount. That’s because the Excelsior Scholarship is a “last dollar” scholarship. This means the exact amount of the scholarship is based on how much you need to cover the remaining costs of attendance after receiving other forms of federal financial aid (e.g. Pell grants, scholarships, etc). 

It’s also important to keep in mind that the Excelsior Scholarship only covers the cost of tuition. So, you’ll still need to pay out of pocket or find additional sources of funding for things like books, room and board, daily living expenses, etc.

Another thing to know right away is that to accept an Excelsior Scholarship, you’ll need to sign an agreement stating that you will live and work in the state of New York after graduating for the same number of years you receive the scholarship. 

If you decide to break this agreement, the scholarship becomes a 10-year zero-interest loan that you’ll need to pay back. 

Excelsior Scholarship Program School List 

As you may know, the CUNY and SUNY public college system includes a lot of schools. That’s good news because it means you have a lot of options for where you could use the Excelsior Scholarship!

Here’s a list of all of the schools that currently participate in the Excelsior Scholarship Program: 

CUNY Colleges

Bronx Community College
Baruch College
Borough of Manhattan Community College
Brooklyn College
College of Staten Island
Guttman Community College
Hostos Community College
Hunter College
John Jay College of Criminal Justice
Kingsborough Community College
LaGuardia Community College
Lehman College
Macaulay Honors College
Medgar Evers College
New York City College of Technology (City Tech)
Queens College
Queensborough Community College
The City College of New York (CCNY)
York College

SUNY Colleges 

Buffalo State College
Cayuga Community College
Clinton Community College
College of Agriculture & Technology at Cobleskill
College of Environmental Science and Forestry
College of Technology at Canton
College of Technology at Delhi
Columbia-Greene Community College
Corning Community College
Dutchess Community College
Empire State College
Erie Community College
Farmingdale State College
Fashion Institute of Technology
Finger Lakes Community College
Fulton-Montgomery Community College
Genesee Community College
Herkimer County Community College
Hudson Valley Community College
Jamestown Community College
Jefferson Community College
Maritime College
Mohawk Valley Community College
Monroe Community College
Nassau Community College
Niagara County Community College
North Country Community College
NYS College of Agriculture & Life Sciences at Cornell University
NYS College of Human Ecology at Cornell University
NYS School of Industrial & Labor Relations at Cornell University
Onondaga Community College
Orange County Community College
Rockland Community College
Schenectady County Community College
Stony Brook University
Suffolk County Community College
Sullivan County Community College
SUNY Broome Community College
SUNY Cortland
SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University
SUNY Fredonia
SUNY Geneseo
SUNY Morrisville
SUNY New Paltz
SUNY Old Westbury
SUNY Oneonta
SUNY Oswego
SUNY Plattsburgh
SUNY Polytechnic Institute
SUNY Potsdam
SUNY Purchase
Tompkins Cortland Community College
Ulster County Community College
University at Buffalo
Upstate Medical University
Westchester Community College
Eligibility for Excelsior Scholarship Program 

With so many options for where you can study, the Excelsior Scholarship sounds like a great opportunity, right? Let’s check to make sure you’re eligible to apply! 

According to the latest application requirements, to be eligible for an Excelsior Scholarship, you must fit the following criteria: 

New York resident for at least one year before applying 
U.S high school graduate
A family income of $125,000 or less
Pursuing an undergraduate degree at a SUNY or CUNY college, including community colleges and the statutory colleges at Cornell University and Alfred University
Sign a contract agreeing to reside in New York State (NYS) for the length of time the award was received, and, if employed during such time, be employed in NYS
Enrolled in at least 12 credits per term and complete at least 30 credits each year (successively), applicable toward your degree program through continuous study with no break in enrollment except for certain reasons that can be documented
If you attended college prior to the 2021-22 academic year, you need to have earned at least 30 credits each year (successively), applicable toward your degree program prior to applying
In a non-default status on a student loan made under any NYS or federal education loan program or on the repayment of any NYS award
In compliance with the terms of the service condition(s) imposed by an NYS award that you have previously received
How to Apply for the Excelsior Scholarship 

As long as you fit the eligibility requirements we just mentioned, applying for the Excelsior Scholarship is relatively simple. 

You just need to submit:

The Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) 
The New York Tuition Assistance Program (TAP) Application 
The Excelsior Scholarship Program Application 
Copies of you and your parents’ latest New York state tax returns 
Copies of your college transcripts 
Excelsior Scholarship Application Timeline 

The timeline for the Excelsior Scholarship is also pretty simple. 

October 21 – April 22: Submit the FAFSA and TAP

May: The Excelsior Scholarship Program application opens 

July – August: The application closes  

Once you’re approved to receive the Excelsior Scholarship, the award amount will be included in your next financial aid package. 

And that’s it! What’s also great is that you won’t need to reapply for the scholarship if you need it for multiple years. 

Where to Find More Scholarships 

The Excelsior Scholarship is just one of many amazing scholarship opportunities you can win to help pay for college. And since it only covers the cost of tuition, you may still be on the lookout for some more scholarships.

So, be sure to check out Scholly Search, our awesome scholarship database that can help you find all of the scholarships you’re qualified for! You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips and strategies on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the Coca-Cola Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
There are over 1 million scholarships available to students just like you every year — with a significant percentage of them going unclaimed! The same goes for federal and state financial aid – where more than $130 billion dollar is dispersed every year – even with millions of eligible students never taking the time to apply.

Why? 

Well, we think it may have something to do with some pervasive myths out there about scholarships and financial aid that keeps student from applying. You’re probably already familiar with the most common ones, but allow us to refresh your memory: 

“You need to have a perfect academic record.” 
“You need to be disadvantaged.” 
“You have to be an all-star athlete.” 
“You have to be lucky.” 

Yikes! It’s no wonder most students don’t even bother…

Luckily, those myths are far from true — which is why we want to help set the record straight! 

We want you to know that applying for scholarships and financial aid is well worth your time and effort no matter what kind of student you are or what your background looks like. And the facts we’re about to share we’ll prove just that. 

Let’s get started with some quick facts about the cost of a college education!

Facts and Statistics about the Cost of a College Education

You don’t need us to tell you that a college education can be expensive. But what does ‘expensive’ really mean when it comes to paying for college these days? 

Let’s take a look at the average cost per year (2019 – 2020) for the major options you might consider for your post-secondary education. 

Fact #1: For a two-year community college, you’ll be looking at an average cost of $3,440 per year (includes in-district tuition and fees).
Fact #2: For a 4-year public college, you’ll be looking at an average cost of $10,116 per year if you’re in-state (includes tuition and fees).
Fact #3: For a 4-year public college, you’ll be looking at an average cost of $22,577 per year if you’re out-of-state (includes tuition and fees).
Fact #4: For a 4-year private college, you’ll be looking at an average cost of $36,801 per year (includes tuition and fees).

Source

Did those numbers scare or surprise you? If so, we totally get it. But by no means are you alone. 

Many students and families see those price tags — particularly for private and out-of-state public colleges — and think, “There’s no way I can afford that! At least not without a massive amount of student loans…” 

In fact, according to a 2019 study from Sallie Mae, the cost of colleges governs the decision making for nearly 8 in 10 families.

But there are a few more facts that we think you should know about the cost of a college education. 

Fact #5: Of the top 25 universities ranked for best value in the 2020 U.S. News & World Report, 96% are private colleges due to financial aid packages

If you remember the difference in cost between public and private colleges, you may be confused by this last fact. How is it true? 

Well, the U.S. News & World Report bases this ranking on the academic quality of the school as well as the net cost of attendance for a student who received the average level of need-based financial aid.

But, more importantly, although private colleges have a higher price tag on average, they are also much more likely to offer generous financial aid packages to attract students from all economic backgrounds. 

Fact #6: 15 US states currently offer tuition-free aid programs for students attending eligible community colleges. 

These programs are typically called Promise Programs and are available for students who choose to attend certain community colleges within their state of residence.

Fact #7: 85% of students receive some form of financial aid to help cover the cost of college (yet millions don’t maximize their aid by fully exploring federal, state, and school aid programs)

(If you want to learn more about facts 5-7, check out The Secret to Paying $0 for College and Graduating Debt Free!)

Facts and Statistics about Scholarships 

Alright, now that we have a better idea of how much a college education actually costs, we can look at some facts about Scholly’s favorite way students pay for college: scholarships! 

Fact #8: According to the latest National Student Aid Study, there are approximately 1,581,000 scholarships available to students every year. 
Fact #9: When calculating the total amount offered by all scholarships, there is about $6.1 billion available to students! 
Fact #10: The average scholarship amount per student is $3,852.

Those numbers may seem too good to be true. But, fortunately, they’re not! 

Scholarships can come from many different sources, including academic and athletic departments at universities, the government, local charities and organizations, large corporations, fast food chains, and more. 

Scholarships can also come in many different amounts, with some being as little as a few hundred dollars and others being full-ride scholarships that cover the full cost of tuition, fees, room and board. 

But what can feel like it’s too good to be true, however, is actually locating all of the scholarships you’d want to apply for — which brings us to our next fact…

Fact #11: 42% of scholarships can’t be found searching Google due to the antiquated way so many scholarships are set up on charity or foundation websites. 

What do we mean by this? Unfortunately, many scholarship websites haven’t been updated to account for how we search for things on Google. Sometimes scholarship applications are buried on old websites or only available as downloadable PDFs.

This problem, among other things, definitely contributes to the issue raised by our next fact…

Fact #12: More than $100 million dollars in scholarships go unclaimed every year! 

If you’re thinking “that’s a lot of money…,” you are right. It definitely is!

And at Scholly, our goal is to help students find and win as many scholarships as they can. Our database of scholarships on Scholly Search helps make that possible. 

As long as there are students who need it, there shouldn’t be so much unclaimed scholarship money!  

And do you know who is most likely to miss out on those unclaimed scholarships? Boys! Why? Well, it’s interesting, but…

Fact #13: On average, 67% of scholarship applicants are female. 

Why is that exactly? We’re not entirely sure. But, either way, one thing is for sure. More students need to start taking advantage of all of the available scholarships out there! 

Facts and Statistics about Other Forms of Financial Aid 

Now, we’re going to look at a few facts about other forms of financial aid available to college students who submit the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA).

If you’ve never filled out the FAFSA before or need to refresh your memory, make sure to check out How to Apply for FAFSA! 

It’s pretty important that you do submit the FAFSA. And we think you’ll understand why when seeing that…

Fact #14: In the 2016-17 academic year, 1,234,249 high school graduates didn’t fill out or submit the FAFSA, which resulted in $2.3 billion in free federal grant money going unused!

And the FAFSA doesn’t just determine how much aid you receive in the form of grants. It also determines whether you’re eligible for things like work-study programs and federal student loans. 

Fact #15: More than half a million students participate in the federal work-study program every year. 

For the work-study program, federal funds subsidize up to 75% of your wages at a part-time job on campus or a partner organization. The paycheck you earn can help you pay for things like books, transportation, and general living costs. But work-study is only available to students whose FAFSA results show financial need. 

Fact #16: For the graduating class of 2018, the average student loan debt is $29,200.

This last fact may seem daunting. But remember, you can potentially avoid racking up your own student loan debt by really going after as many scholarships as you can. By doing so, you could even graduate debt-free! 

Final Thoughts

We hope this post has encouraged you to make decisions based on facts when it comes to determining how you will pay for college.

In particular, we hope it has shown you just how important it is to take advantage of scholarships! 

If you remember one thing, let it be this: there is over $100 million worth of scholarships going unclaimed every year. With the right strategy for finding and applying for scholarships, some of that money can be yours! 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
To write a good personal statement, you have to think outside of the box. You’ve got to write an essay so interesting that it leaves whoever reading it wanting to know more about you. And, in most cases, you have to do all of that in less than 2 pages! 

Tricky? Yes. But it’s 100% possible when you know what you’re doing!

That’s why in this post we’re going to show you how you can write an amazing personal statement for college and scholarship applications in just 7 steps. 

But before we dive into what each of those steps will look like, we’re going to start things off by answering a few common questions on personal statements like:

What is a personal statement?
What’s the purpose of the personal statement?
What’s the difference between a personal statement for college and a personal statement for scholarships?
What do I write about in my personal statement? 
What makes a good personal statement? 

Let’s take a look at that first question now! 

What is a personal statement?

A personal statement is a short personal essay that you’ll need to write when applying for most colleges and some scholarships.

You might also hear people refer to the personal statement as a “college essay,” “scholarship essay,” “Common app essay,” “Coalition app essay,” or a “statement of purpose”. 

What’s the purpose of the personal statement?

The personal statement is one of the only parts of the application where the people reviewing your application get to hear directly from you. It’s their opportunity to see what has shaped and inspired the person you are today.

And, let’s be real. They’d never be able to get that information from a transcript, standardized test score, or even a recommendation letter! 

That being said, the purpose behind personal statements for college applications and personal statements for scholarship applications does differ slightly. 

What’s the difference between a personal statement for college and a personal statement for scholarships? 

For college applications, the purpose of the personal statement is to give college admissions officers insight into what makes you unique and how thoughtfully you can reflect on your life experiences. They’re looking for self-awareness, intellectual promise, creativity, and individuality. 

For scholarship applications, the purpose of the personal statement is to show that you are an ideal candidate and representative of the scholarship foundation’s mission. It can definitely have some of the same qualities as the college personal statement. But, depending on the scholarship, you may need to directly answer in your essay questions like why you deserve the scholarship, what you plan to study in college, and what you hope to do in the future.

What do I write about in a personal statement? 

What you write about in your personal statement depends on how you plan to submit your applications.

For college applications, you’ll likely use the Common Application or the Coalition Application, which both have their own essay prompts and requirements.

Let’s take a look at the essay prompts found on each of these college application portals and a few personal statement prompts for scholarship applications. 

The Common App essay prompts

There are nearly 900 colleges and universities that use the Common App! If you’re applying to one of them, you’ll need to write a 650-word (max) personal statement that addresses one of seven prompts: 

Some students have a background, identity, interest, or talent that is so meaningful they believe their application would be incomplete without it. If this sounds like you, then please share your story.
The lessons we take from obstacles we encounter can be fundamental to later success. Recount a time when you faced a challenge, setback, or failure. How did it affect you, and what did you learn from the experience?
Reflect on a time when you questioned or challenged a belief or idea. What prompted your thinking? What was the outcome?
Describe a problem you’ve solved or a problem you’d like to solve. It can be an intellectual challenge, a research query, an ethical dilemma – anything that is of personal importance, no matter the scale. Explain its significance to you and what steps you took or could be taken to identify a solution.
Discuss an accomplishment, event, or realization that sparked a period of personal growth and a new understanding of yourself or others.
Describe a topic, idea, or concept you find so engaging that it makes you lose all track of time. Why does it captivate you? What or who do you turn to when you want to learn more?
Share an essay on any topic of your choice. It can be one you’ve already written, one that responds to a different prompt, or one of your own design.
The Coalition App essay prompts

You may also apply to colleges and universities on the Coalition App. If so, you’ll need to write a 500-550 word personal statement that addresses one of five prompts: 

Tell a story from your life, describing an experience that either demonstrates your character or helped to shape it.
Describe a time when you made a meaningful contribution to others in which the greater good was your focus. Discuss the challenges and rewards of making your contribution.
Has there been a time when you’ve had a long-cherished or accepted belief challenged? How did you respond? How did the challenge affect your beliefs?
What is the hardest part of being a student now? What’s the best part? What advice would you give a younger sibling or friend (assuming they would listen to you)?
Submit an essay on a topic of your choice.
Scholarship application essay prompt examples  

Some scholarship applications don’t require a personal statement. But, for the ones that do, you can expect to write an essay that focuses more on your readiness for college and what you hope to accomplish in the future. 

For example, here are two scholarship essay prompts: 

Carrington-Philbert-Scholarship

Please write an essay (250 – 500 words) addressing the following: What has been the driving force for you to pursue a higher education? What are your passions and how do you plan to ensure you follow them?

Dell Scholarship 

Describe the most significant challenges you may face transitioning to and while in college and what steps you may take to address those challenges. As appropriate, include skills/strategies you learned in your College Readiness Program that have prepared you to be successful in college.

(If you plan to apply for the Dell Scholarship, also check out How to Win the Dell Scholarship!)

For tips on how to write these shorter scholarship essays, check out our guide on how to write a 500 word essay for scholarship applications.

What makes a good personal statement?

Whether you’re writing a personal statement for your college applications or scholarship applications, there are some general characteristics of good and bad personal statements. 

Let’s take a look!

Characteristics of a good personal statement

A good personal statement…

Reveals something about you not seen in other parts of your application 
Has a creative narrative structure
Does more showing than telling 
Demonstrates your potential to thrive in college and in life
Is free of careless mistakes in spelling, grammar, etc. 
Characteristics of a bad personal statement 

On the other hand, a bad personal statement…

Reads like a laundry list of your accomplishments
Sounds more like a research paper than a creative story about your life 
Does more telling than showing 
Rambles without giving the reader any idea who you are 
Is full of clichés and mistakes in spelling, grammar, etc.
How to write an amazing personal statement in 7 steps 

Alright, now that we have those general questions out of the way, we can get to the good stuff! 

Here are 7 steps you can follow to help you write an amazing personal statement: 

Step 1: Brainstorm to find the best topics to write about  

The personal statement is your one shot to truly show college admission officers and scholarship selection committees who you are. So, rather than picking the first idea that comes to mind. Do some brainstorming to find a few good potential options. 

Ask yourself questions like: 

What are some of my greatest accomplishments? What did I have to do to achieve those accomplishments? 
What obstacles have I overcome in my life? How have those experiences shaped how I view the world today? What actions did they inspire me to take later in life? 
What makes me different from my peers? What are some stories from my life that really show those qualities? 
What do I love doing? When and why did I start doing that activity? What interesting experiences have I had because of how much I love doing this activity?
What’s the most important lesson I have learned in my life? When, where, and from who did I learn that lesson? How has that lesson influenced my aspirations?  

Write down the stories that stand out to you as being the most likely to be an interesting topic for a personal statement.

Step 2: Get feedback from someone who can be objective about your essay topic 

Now that you have one or more stories for your personal statement topic, it’s time to get some feedback. But keep in mind that not all feedback is useful feedback when it comes to personal statements.

For example, your parents or friends might like the story you’ve chosen because it highlights one of the qualities they like most about you. But, without knowing much about the college admissions or scholarship application process themselves, they might encourage you to write about a topic that’s cliché or not suitable for your applications. 

Instead, get feedback from someone like your school guidance counselor, your favorite teacher, or a student who recently applied to college. 

Step 3: Outline a personal statement for the most promising topic

Once you have a promising idea for your personal statement, the next thing you’ll want to do is set yourself up for success with a solid outline. 

A good outline will help you structure each section, avoid leaving out important information, and serve as a guide when you actually start writing. 

You can also use your outline to decide what are the one or two qualities you hope to express throughout the essay. For example, by the end of the essay, do you want the reader to think of you as highly-creative? An expert problem solver? Someone who is committed to giving back to their community? 

Step 4: Free-write as much as you can in your first draft

The first few drafts of your personal statement don’t need to be perfect. So, rather than stressing about the first sentence or the quality of your writing, start by free-writing. 

Free-writing will help you get all of your ideas on to paper, making it possible for you to see and decide what is and isn’t actually interesting later on. Sometimes the best ideas come from random ideas you initially thought were unimportant! 

Just don’t go too overboard with how much you free-write. You might regret that later when it comes time for the next step. 

Step 5: Edit and cut it down to a readable draft 

Now that you have a complete first draft with all of your ideas on paper, it’s time to start the first round of editing.

Take another look at your original outline and ask yourself:

Did I achieve the goal of my essay? 
What can I cut from the story without losing the flow of the essay? 
Am I including enough examples?
Did I miss any important details? 
Am I using descriptive language to creatively show what I am talking about or does my personal statement sound like a research paper? 

Make sure to also cut it down to the right word count and start checking for spelling and grammar mistakes. 

Step 6: Get feedback on your draft 

Now, it’s time to get more feedback. But this time, you should have multiple people read it. That way, you can collect data on what is and isn’t working. 

To get the most useful feedback, ask your readers questions like:

Does anything in my personal statement seem insincere, made up, or not fully explained? 
Is the essay coherent with a clear beginning, middle, and end?  
What did you learn about me after reading the essay? 
Does it make you want to know more about me? 
Do you have any advice on how it could be better? 

If any of those things don’t match up with what you were aiming for, keep working on it! 

Step 7: Edit again

You knew this last step was coming, didn’t you? In the final stretch, it’s time to polish your essay until it’s gold! 

Take into account all of the feedback you have received and make any necessary adjustments. Make sure to also edit again for word length, correct grammar, spelling, sentence flow, word choice, etc. 

7 more personal statement tips 
#1 Start early

Good ideas take time. To give yourself the best shot at writing the best personal statement, at least start brainstorming and freewriting your ideas a few months before the application deadlines.

#2 Use your voice 

College admissions and scholarship committees want to know who you are. And that means using your voice throughout the essay and avoiding throwing in big words just for the sake of trying to sound smart. 

#3 Start with a strong introduction 

Your personal statement needs to hook the reader from the first line. Why? Because if not, you run the risk of the reader immediately starting to skim rather than actually read your essay. Not ideal! 

#4 Follow the word limit 

The word limit on personal statements is not a suggestion. It’s a requirement. That means any word over the word limit will not be included when you submit your application. So, to avoid leaving your readers confused by an incomplete concluding sentence, always follow the word limit! 

#5 Be willing to start over if an idea isn’t working  

Just because you started working on one idea for your personal statement doesn’t mean you should force it to be the topic of your personal statement. If after a few drafts, you find that the story you chose to tell in your personal statement just isn’t working, start over. You only get to submit the application once, so make sure it’s something you will be happy with! 

#6 Pick the prompt for your college personal statement after you finish writing 

Do you remember the last essay prompt on both the Common App and Coalition App? For both, it says you can submit an essay on a topic of your choice. What does that mean? You shouldn’t get stuck trying to pick the “right” prompt before you start writing. The prompts are really just there for guidance. As long as you follow the steps we laid out earlier, your essay will fit at least one of the essay prompts. 

#7 Adapt your college personal statement for scholarship applications 

Since scholarship applications differ quite a bit, you’re better off adapting your college personal statement to your scholarship personal statements rather than the other way around. 

Just remember, that unlike the personal statement for colleges, the scholarship personal statement might require you to be more direct and answer questions about why you deserve the scholarship and your plans for college.

(For more tips on how to write scholarship essays, check out How to Write a Scholarship Essay and Win BIG!)

Personal statement examples 

If you’re still not sure you’re ready to get started on your personal statement, it might help to look at a few examples. 

Here are examples of successful personal statements for a college application and a scholarship application. 

Personal statement for college example

This personal statement comes from a student who was recently admitted to Johns Hopkins University. It’s a great example of how to hook the reader’s attention in the introduction and use storytelling techniques to build interest right away. It also highlights an important activity for the student and gives insight into what makes him different. 

I looked up and flinched slightly. There were at least sixty of them, far more than expected. I had thirty weeks to teach them the basics of public speaking. Gritting my teeth, I split my small group of tutors among the crowd and sat down for an impromptu workshop with the eighth graders. They were inexperienced, monotone, and quiet. In other words, they reminded me of myself…

I was born with a speech impediment that weakened my mouth muscles. My speech was garbled and incomprehensible. Understandably, I grew up quiet. I tried my best to blend in and give the impression I was silent by choice. I joined no clubs in primary school, instead preferring isolation. It took six years of tongue twisters and complicated mouth contortions in special education classes for me to produce the forty-four sounds of the English language.

Then, high school came. I was sick of how confining my quiet nature had become. For better or for worse, I decided to finally make my voice heard.

Scanning the school club packet, I searched for my place. Most activities just didn’t feel right. But then, I sat in on a debate team practice and was instantly hooked. I was captivated by how confidently the debaters spoke and how easily they commanded attention. I knew that this was the path forward.

Of course, this was all easier said than done. Whenever it was my turn to debate, I found that I was more of a deer in the headlights than a person enjoying the spotlight. My start was difficult, and I stuttered more than I spoke in those first few weeks. Nonetheless, I began using the same tools as I did when I learned to speak all those years ago: practice and time. I watched the upperclassmen carefully, trying to speak as powerfully as they did. I learned from my opponents and adapted my style through the hundreds of rounds I lost. With discipline, I drilled, repeating a single speech dozens of times until I got it right.

Day by day, I began to stand a little taller and talk a little louder both inside and outside of debate. In a few months, my blood no longer froze when I was called on in class. I found I could finally look other people in the eyes when I talked to them without feeling embarrassed. My posture straightened and I stopped fidgeting around strangers. I began to voice my opinions as opposed to keeping my ideas to myself. As my debate rank increased from the triple to single-digits, so too did my standing at school. I began interacting with my teachers more and leading my peers in clubs. In discussions, I put forward my ideas with every bit as much conviction as my classmates. When seniors began to ask me for advice and teachers recruited me to teach underclassmen, I discovered not only that I had been heard, but that others wanted to listen. At heart, I am still reserved (some things never change), but in finding my voice, I found a strength I could only dream of when I stood in silence so many years ago.

Standing in front of the crowd of students, it was my hope that by founding this program, I could give them an experience that was as empowering as mine had been for me. As the weeks passed, the students inched past their insecurities and towards finding their voices, just as I had always wanted to do. On the last day of class for that year, I looked up and saw each of the students standing confidently, equipped and ready to speak their minds in whatever they wanted to do. They had come a long way from being the shy and stuttering novices that they were just thirty weeks before—I can’t wait to see how far they can go from here.

If you want to find more examples of successful personal statements for colleges, check out these awesome resources! 

Essays that Worked – Connecticut College
Essays that Worked – Johns Hopkins University
Essays that Worked – Hamilton College
Common Application Essays  – Tufts University
Personal statement for scholarships example

Here’s a scholarship personal statement that comes from a student who won the Kang Foundation Scholarship. The essay also does a great job of immediately grabbing the reader’s attention and creatively narrating a unique story from the student’s life. Notice how it could easily be used for a college personal statement right up until the end where it directly speaks to scholarship selection committees. 

Fedora? Check. Apron? Check. Tires pumped? Check. Biking the thirty-five minutes each evening to the cafe and back to work a six-hour shift was exhausting, but my family’s encouragement and gratitude for the extra income was worth it.

A few years earlier, my family of nine had been evicted from the home we had been living in for the past ten years. With nowhere else to go, we moved into our church’s back room for three months, where I shamefully tried to hide our toothbrushes and extra shoes from other church members. Right then I made a commitment to my family to contribute financially in whatever way I could. My sacrifice translated to a closer bond with my siblings and deeper conversations with my parents, helping me understand the true meaning of a unified family and the valuable part I play in that.

With the financial stability that my part-time jobs provided my mother could stay home to raise seven children, my learning-disabled older sister could attend college, my younger sister could go on a mission trip to Korea, and my twin siblings could compete in national math competitions. I’ve seen that even as a high school student, I have so much potential to impact my family and beyond — how one small act can go a long way.

Through the successes of my efforts, I also realized that poverty was just a societal limitation. I was low-income, not poor. I was still flourishing in school, leading faith-based activities and taking an active role in community service. My low-income status was not a barrier but a launching pad to motivate and propel my success.

To additionally earn more money as a young teen, I began flipping bicycles for profit on craigslist. Small adjustments in the brake and gears, plus a wash, could be the difference between a $50 piece of trash and a $200 steal. Seeing how a single inch could disarrange the lining of gears not only taught me the importance of detail but also sparked my fascination with fixing things.

When I was sixteen I moved on to a larger project: my clunker of a car. I had purchased my 2002 Elantra with my own savings, but it was long past its prime. With some instruction from a mechanic, I began to learn the components of an engine motor and the engineering behind it. I repaired my brake light, replaced my battery, and made adjustments to the power-steering hose. Engineering was no longer just a nerdy pursuit of robotics kids; it was a medium to a solution. It could be a way to a career, doing the things I love. I was inspired to learn more.

Last summer, to continue exploring my interest in engineering, I interned at Boeing. Although I spent long hours researching and working in the lab for the inertial navigation of submarines, I learned most from the little things.

From the way my mentors and I began working two hours earlier than required to meet deadlines, I learned that engineering is the commitment of long hours. From the respect and humility embodied within our team, I learned the value of unity at the workplace. Like my own family at home, our unity and communal commitment to working led to excellent results for everyone and a closer connection within the group.

What most intrigues me about engineering is not just the math or the technology, but the practical application. It is through engineering that I can fix up my car… and facilitate submarine navigation. Engineering, in fact, is a lifestyle —  instead of lingering over hardships, I work to solve them and learn from them. Whether the challenge is naval defense or family finances or even just a flat tire on my bike before another night shift, I will be solving these problems and will always be looking to keep rolling on.  

Success is triumphing over hardships — willing yourself over anything and everything to achieve the best for yourself and your family. With this scholarship, I will use it to continue focusing on my studies in math and engineering, instead of worrying about making money and sending more back home. It will be an investment into myself for my family.

Final thoughts

Writing a personal statement for college or scholarship applications may take some time and effort. But if you follow the advice we’ve shared here, we know you’ll be able to write an amazing one that helps increase your chances of being admitted to the college of your dreams and winning some scholarships to help cover the cost! 

And if you want more advice on how to pay for college, make sure to check out the Scholly blog where we share tips on how to find and win scholarships, avoid student loan debt, and get the most out of your college education.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
$20,000. That’s how much you could win to help fund the cost of your college education as a recipient of the Coca-Cola Scholarship!

It’s a very generous award. And preparing an application deserves strong consideration for a spot on your scholarship application to-do list! 

To help you get started, this post is going to cover everything you need to know to put together a winning application!

Our goal is to help you maximize your chances of joining the ranks of one of the best scholarship programs out there and get $20,000 closer to paying $0 for college. 

Let’s start now with a quick overview of the Coca-Cola Scholarship and then work our way down to some application tips and strategies you can use!

One note before we jump in: If you’d like to apply to more scholarships than just the Coca-Cola Scholarship, Scholly Search is the #1 scholarship app in the world and will instantly match you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits. Give it a try today with a 100% free trial!

What is the Coca-Cola Scholarship? 

Awarded by the Coca-Cola Scholars Foundation, a subsidiary of the Coca-Cola Company, the Coca-Cola Scholarship is an achievement-based scholarship.

It’s awarded annually to 150 graduating high school seniors who, according to the Foundation, have demonstrated “their capacity to lead and serve, as well as their commitment to making a significant impact on their schools and communities.” 

To date, over 6,300 students have benefited from the Coca-Cola Scholarship! 

When and how do you get to use the $20,000 award? As a winner of the scholarship, you get 4-10 years to use the full amount of the award on tuition at an accredited college or university to pay for tuition and other educational expenses like on-campus housing, a new computer, or textbooks. 

And there are some additional perks as well! You’d also become part of the large network of Coca-Cola Scholars and get an invite to the Coca-Cola Scholars Foundation’s frequent receptions throughout the country and the Leadership Summit in Atlanta every 5 years. 

The network of Coca-Cola Scholars is made up of many impressive alumni (including the founder of Scholly!) across a range of professions and industries. 

Eligibility Requirements for the Coca-Cola Scholarship

By now, you may be thinking: “This sounds great! I want to apply!” Awesome – let’s just make sure you’re eligible. 

According to the latest requirements, to be eligible to apply for the Coca-Cola Scholarship, you must: 

Be a current high school (or home-schooled) student attending a school in the US 
Graduate and receive a high school diploma in the same academic year as the scholarship application deadline 
Be a U.S. Citizen, U.S. National, U.S. Permanent Resident, Refugee, Asylee, Cuban-Haitain Entrant, or Humanitarian Parolee 
Intend to pursue a degree at an accredited U.S. post-secondary institution

You must also not be:

The child or grandchild of an employee, officer, or owner of the Coca-Cola bottling companies, the Coca-Cola company, Company divisions or subsidiaries
An international student 
How to Apply for the Coca-Cola Scholarship 

You’re in luck. This scholarship doesn’t require application essays or supplementary documents. The only application requirement for the Coca-Cola Scholarship is that you submit a complete application. 

But don’t be fooled! The application itself will still take some work to complete. Here’s an overview of all of the information you’ll be expected to include: 

Contact information 

In addition to your personal contact information, you’ll need to provide your high school’s ACT/SAT code and the emails and telephone numbers of your school counselor and principal.

Your academic record 

In addition to your grades and courses starting from your freshman year, you’ll also need to know your class rank and class size. And if your school has AP, IB, and/or Honors courses, you’ll also need to know how many are offered. 

List of school clubs and organizations 

In this section, you’ll list your involvement and leadership roles in clubs and organizations like: 

Student Council
Class Officer
Academic / Honor Societies
School newspaper or School Literary Magazine, School Yearbook
Drama, Theater, Dance or Other Performing Arts 
Speech, Debate, or Forensics
Music (Band, Orchestra, Vocal)
Visual arts
Athletics
Any Other School-Related Clubs, Organizations, or Intramurals
List of school and non-school related awards, honors, special skills, or talents 

In this section, you’ll also have to choose your highest level of accomplishment (local, state, regional, national) for each grade that you received the award or honor. 

List of community service and volunteer activities 

Similar to the section for clubs and organizations, in this section, you’ll list your involvement and leadership roles in unpaid community service activities. You’ll also need to include any awards you’ve received for those activities, the total number of hours you committed to community service during each grade level, and the number of volunteer hours that are mandatory for graduation. 

List of paid work experiences 

For any paid employment, you’ll need to include information on the number of weeks employed, average number of hours worked per week during the school year, and average number of hours worked during the summer. 

And that’s it! 

If you’re reading this while the application is closed but want a preview of the complete application, take a look at the official Coca-Cola Scholarship sample application.

Coca-Cola Scholarship Application Timeline

Alright, if you’re eligible and hoping to make that $20,000 yours, you probably now have questions like: 

When does the Coca-Cola Scholarship application open up? 
When is the Coca-Cola Scholarship deadline? 
When are the Coca-Cola Scholarship winners announced? 

In which case, we got you covered! Let’s look at a timeline — from start to finish — of what you should expect when applying for the Coca-Cola Scholarship. 

August: The Coca-Cola Scholarship application opens

October: The application closes at the end of the month 

November: 2,000 semi-finalists are selected to advance 

December: Semi-finalist submit extra scholarship application materials 

January: Semi-finalists are narrowed down to 250 applications 

February: Remaining semi-finalists participate in regional interviews 

March: 150 Coca-Cola Scholarship winners are announced 

Late March / Early April: Scholarship winners are invited to attend Scholars Weekend in Atlanta 

Tips and Strategies for Winning the Coca-Cola Scholarship

Thousands of students apply for the Coca-Cola Scholarship every year. But only 150 are ultimately chosen. Here’s what you can do to increase your chances at winning the Coca-Cola Scholarship! 

#1 Start preparing the application early 

Given that the application doesn’t require you to write essays or submit supplementary documents, you could probably start and complete it in one afternoon. But should you? Absolutely not! 

If you looked at the sample application (here it is again) then you saw that there’s still quite a bit of information you’ll need to gather. And that will take some time.

Also, since the Coca-Cola scholarship is super competitive, you don’t want to leave important information out or make careless mistakes just because you’re rushing to get it done! 

Our advice: start collecting all the info you’ll need before the application even opens or, at the very least, soon after the application opens. 

#2 Highlight your leadership and involvement in your school community

This one’s important! In fact, it’s what this scholarship is all about. 

As said on their website, the Coca-Cola Foundation exists to improve the world by investing in “exceptional high school students who are dedicated to leadership, service, and action that positively affects others.” 

Make sure to position yourself as one of those exceptional high school students in your application by strategically selecting which clubs, awards, community service, and work experiences on your application. 

What do we mean by that? If you have participated in more activities, volunteer activities, etc. than you can fit on the app, make sure the ones you include are the ones that show in some way your leadership abilities and a commitment to giving back. 

And if you still have a year or two before you’ll apply for the Coca-Cola scholarship, make sure to actively seek out leadership roles and awards in clubs and activities that you both enjoy and make a positive contribution in your community. 

#3 Have someone else review your application before you submit it 

Again, the Coca-Cola Scholarship is very competitive. So, don’t let careless mistakes like typos, spelling mistakes, or grammatical errors be the reason your application goes from a ‘yes’ to a ‘no’!

Have someone like a family member, teacher, or guidance counselor review your application before you press ‘submit’. 

Depending on how well this person knows you, they might also be able to help you make sure you’re not forgetting any important activities, awards or work experiences that deserve a place on your application. 

#4 If you get an interview, practice beforehand 

If you’re lucky enough to be one of the 250 semi-finalists that gets selected for an interview, make sure you practice! 

You may even want to start practicing before you find out if you get an interview or not. Why? Because learning how to interview well isn’t just good for scholarship applications. It’s a skill that will benefit you over and over again in life. 

So, if you start preparing for an interview for the Coca-Cola scholarship and don’t get it, no problem. Your efforts will surely be rewarded with another opportunity down the line. 

What type of questions should you expect? Well, since Coca-Cola Scholars are selected for leadership and service, it’s a good idea to be prepared to answer interview questions like:

Tell me about a personal achievement that makes you proud.
Who are your role models?
What do you plan to study in college and why? 
What are your career goals? 
Why do you think you deserve this scholarship? 
Where to Find More Scholarships 

The $20,000 Coca-Cola Scholarship is just one of many amazing scholarship opportunities you can win to help pay for college!

If you want to find even more scholarships, be sure to check out Scholly Search, our awesome scholarship database that can help you find all of the scholarships you’re qualified for! You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips and strategies on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the Gates Scholarship and the Dell Scholarship.

Good luck! 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
By Christopher Gray, Founder & CEO of Scholly

With the average total cost of a 4-year degree currently sitting at approximately $122,000, the idea of paying $0 for college might sound crazy.

But if you’ve read about my experience paying $0 for college or the stories of countless others, you know $0 for college is within reach. In fact, my experience paying $0 for college is what inspired me to create Scholly in the first place! 

Yes, scholarships are an important piece of the $0 college puzzle. But it’s not the only piece. In this post, I’m going to show you how, with a bit of planning and hardwork, you can pay $0 for college, or at the very least, graduate with $0 in debt. 

With that goal in mind, we’ll look into why I recommend that you: 

Compare financial aid packages from public and private colleges 
Submit the FAFSA early every year 
Take advantage of community colleges and in-state free tuition Promise Programs
Apply for as many scholarships as you can 
Work part-time for a company that offers tuition reimbursement 
Cultivate an entrepreneurial spirit  
Develop a budget you can stick to

Want to know why? Read on to find out! 

1. Compare financial aid packages from public and private colleges 

Public colleges tend to be much cheaper than private ones. So, it only makes sense to go to a public college if you’re really looking to graduate debt free, right? Not so fast!

Public vs. Private Colleges

Average Cost of Tuition, Fees, Room and Board for 2019-20 Academic Year 

Private 	Public
$49,870	$21,950

Source

Although private colleges have a higher price tag on average, they are also much more likely to offer you a generous financial aid package in the form of grants and scholarships that can end up covering a large chunk of the costs. 

For example, for the 2017-18 academic year, the National Center for Education Statistics reported that at public colleges an average of 50% of students received institutional grants with the average grant being $6,200 per year. 

While, on the other hand, at non-profit private colleges, an average of 83% of students received institutional grants with the average grant being $21,300 per year. And that’s not even including other forms of financial aid like federal grants, scholarships, and work study!

Starting to see what we mean about private colleges being able to offer more financial aid?  

This, of course, is only true if you qualify for financial aid. But according to the Princeton Review, 85% of students receive some form of financial aid. 

And, yes, it is still possible to get a good financial aid package from a public college that cuts down on your total costs, especially if you’re eligible for in-state tuition. 

So, our main point here is to not make the mistake of completely disqualifying private colleges just because the price tag seems too high at first glance. Apply to both, public and private colleges, and compare the financial aid offers to find the one that makes the most sense for you.

2. Take advantage of community colleges and in-state free tuition Promise Programs

Another route you may want to consider to get your starting costs for college as close to $0 as possible would be to attend a community college for the first two years.

Depending on what you plan to study, you can either earn an associate degree in your field or credits that are transferable to a four-year college degree. You could potentially even knock out  all of your major’s prerequisite classes at a fraction of the cost.  

According to the National Center for Education Statistics, for the 2018-19 academic year, the average cost per year for a two year degree program at a community college was $3,700 – making it way cheaper than two years at public or private colleges.

Some states now even have Promise Programs, which are statewide programs that offer free tuition to first time, full-time students who are residents of the state to attend a local community college. 

So far, these states have tuition-free Promise Programs for student attending eligible community colleges:

Arkansas
California 
Delaware
Hawaii
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maryland
Missouri
Nevada
New York 
Oklahoma
Oregon 
Rhode Island 
Tennessee 
Washington 

So, if you’re a resident of one of those states and looking to really save some money, you may want to check out those programs! 

3. Submit the FAFSA early every year

Another money saving secret is to fill out and submit the Free Application for Federal Student AId (FAFSA) early. 

Every year the FAFSA opens up in October with a very non-urgent deadline – over half a year later in June. But by no means does that mean you should wait that long to submit it. Quite the contrary, in fact! 

You should submit the application as early as you can. Because according to the U.S. News and World Report, the best financial aid packages go to the qualifying students that apply early. That means those students will receive more aid in the form of grants and scholarships instead of federal loans. 

So, to get your starting cost as close to $0 as possible and make it all the more likely that you’ll graduate debt free, submit your FAFSA as soon as possible! 

If you’ve never filled out the FAFSA before or need a refresher on what you’ll need to complete it, check out our comprehensive guide on How to Apply for FAFSA.

4. Apply for as many scholarships as you can 

While getting the best financial aid package possible is an important first step to making sure your costs for college are low, it might not get you all the way down to $0. 

But securing outside scholarships just might do the trick! In fact, there are even some full-ride scholarships that cover the total cost of tuition, room and board, fees, and even books. 

The only problem is that, if you’re like a lot of students, there’s a chance you’ll miss out on these scholarship opportunities. Why? 

Well, there are many reasons. But these seem to be the most common: 

You don’t know where to find scholarships 
You mistakenly think that you don’t have a good chance at receiving a scholarship because you’re not an A+ student, star athlete, science nerd, etc. 
You’re applying to scholarships but you don’t know how to put together a good enough application to actually get the scholarships

Sound familiar? If so, you’re in luck!

At Scholly, our mission is to help make college affordable for all. So, we have developed a number of tools and resources, like Scholly Search, to help you find, apply and get scholarships to pay for college! 

We highly encourage you to apply for all of the scholarships that you qualify for because it’s one of the best ways to get your costs for college as close to $0 as possible. 

5. Work part-time for a company that offers tuition reimbursement 

To earn some extra money to cover the costs of things like books, leisure activities, and other miscellaneous expenses, you may also consider getting a part-time job while in college. 

If so, a really good idea would be to look into working for a company that offers tuition reimbursement for its employees who are simultaneously enrolled in college. 

What this means is that you can earn money to put toward your college degree in addition to your regular salary! We’d say that’s a win, win. Wouldn’t you?  

Here are 12 companies that currently offer part-time workers tuition reimbursement for approved college programs: 

Starbucks 
Publix 
Chipotle Mexican Grill
Disney
AT&T
Baxter
Verizon
Walmart 
The Home Depot
Boeing
UPS
Smuckers

To find even more companies that offer tuition reimbursement, check out our list of 50 Companies with Amazing Tuition Reimbursement Programs!

6. Cultivate an entrepreneurial spirit  

Another way to make some cash during college involves thinking like an entrepreneur. 

Now, that doesn’t mean you need to develop a product to sell or invent the next social media platform in between classes. Although, by all means, go for it if that’s your thing! 

What we mean, though, is looking for gigs that don’t require you to have a specialized degree, fixed schedule or huge upfront costs to get started. 

We’re talking about things like:

Babysitting
Dog Walking
House sitting 
Tutoring in person or online  
Rideshare driving for Uber or Lyft 
Freelance writing or social media consulting 
Becoming a virtual assistant

These are just a few ideas. There are so many more! We discuss a few of our favorites in our blog posts on online jobs for teens and the best ways to make extra money.  

The best part is that these types of jobs are easy to fit into your schedule as a college student and, depending on what you do and how much time you put into it, could lead to you earning some serious cash that helps you avoid graduating with debt!

7. Develop a realistic budget you can stick to

Budgeting may not seem directly related to going to college for free. But if you follow the other tips we’ve mentioned in this post, budgeting can help make sure you graduate with $0 in debt from loans or credit cards. And that’s the real goal here! 

Unfortunately, though, most students get budgeting wrong. That’s because they think a budget means vowing to cut out all spending on things like eating out at restaurants, the occasional coffee, or really anything fun. What’s wrong with that? It’s not sustainable in the long term! 

So do yourself a favor. Develop a realistic budget that you can stick to! The more detailed you can get when writing your budget, the better. 

Take the time to write down how much you need to spend on fixed costs like rent for off-campus housing and bills as well as variable costs for things you enjoy like going to the movies, going out to eat, etc. 

And when you’re starting out with your first budget, consider using an app to track your expenses. 

For more ideas on how to manage your finances and save money, check out our blog post on how to save money in college.

Final thoughts 

College can be really expensive. But, I hope you can take the “secrets” you’ve learned here to either make going to college for free or graduating debt free a reality! 

And if you want more advice on how to pay for college, make sure to check out the Scholly blog where we share tips on how to apply for scholarships, avoid student loan debt, and get the most out of your college education. 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’re wondering how to win scholarships for college, there’s tons of advice out there. Yes, it can help if you have good grades and a high GPA. And writing a super strong scholarship essay will absolutely help boost your chances of winning significantly. 

But at the core of your scholarship search, there’s one secret that will open up hundreds of thousands of dollars in scholarship opportunities to you: knowing what makes you unique. In other words, what makes you YOU. 

Here’s why: there are thousands of scholarships out there for everything: being a woman, being tall, being the first in your family to go to college, being a chess player. And much more.

And you, as a unique person and student, have a totally unique combination of qualities that make you eligible for all kinds of scholarships that most students simply don’t qualify for. The trick is identifying these qualities and applying for scholarships that offer monetary rewards for them. 

At Scholly, it’s this focus on what makes you unique that’s allowed us to help students win more than $100 million dollars in scholarships. With the Scholly app, we help you easily identify unique traits about yourself and then match you with amazing scholarships based on them.

But whether you’re using Scholly or researching scholarships the old school way, knowing what makes you stand out could be the difference between winning a few scholarships and winning hundreds of thousands of dollars and not paying a penny for school.

Now in reality, you have a potentially endless number of unique traits, so let’s take a look at the major scholarship parameters that will help you win scholarships. 

We recommend that you start by making a list of all of the qualities about you that you can possibly think of under each of the following categories (we’ll breakdown each in a minute): 

The Basics
Family
Financial
Religion 
Extracurriculars
Location
Academic
Employment
Medical
Military
Volunteer work

Keep in mind that the following lists aren’t exhaustive, but they cover a broad spectrum of parameters out there, and they’ll give you a great idea of how many scholarships you can actually win. 

Oh, and even if you don’t think a particular circumstance or trait is scholarship-worthy, write it down anyway! You may be pleasantly surprised by what kinds of financial awards are out there for you!

How to Win Scholarships 101: Consider These Traits When Searching For Scholarship Opportunities 
#1 The Basics

These are the categories that more broadly define who you are and there are certainly scholarships for all of them. However, since these are more general categories, more people will apply for them, meaning you’ll have more competition. That said, you should certainly search for scholarships based on:

Your race (e.g. “scholarships for African American students”)
Your gender (e.g. “scholarships for women,” “scholarships for non-binary students,” etc.)
The specific schools you’re considering (e.g. “Scholarships for Harvard University”)
Whether you’re an undergraduate,graduate, or PHD student
#2 Family Circumstances

Your family is likely your central community so any factors that influence your family members impact you as well. And trust us when we say that there are loads of scholarships out there that relate to family circumstances. Here are some examples of family circumstances for which there are scholarships:

Having a single parent
Being a child of divorce
Being the child of LGTBQ+ parents
Being adopted or having an adopted child
Having or caring for an elderly, sick, or disabled family member
Being the child of an immigrant/being a first generation American
Being the child of a public service professional (e.g. your parents work for the government, law enforcement, the fire department, etc.)
Being directly affected by the death (including suicide) of a family member
Being impacted by a parent or family member’s job move (e.g. moving to a new state or country for their job).
Having been homeless and being currently homeless
Being the child of a migrant worker
Being a foster child
#3 Financial Circumstances 

College is very expensive, so your financial circumstances are a huge factor in your scholarship eligibility. Here are some of the most common financial circumstances that can help you qualify for scholarships:

Coming from a low-income household (there may be specific income thresholds for individual scholarships)
Paying out-of-state tuition
Being a public housing resident
Having low or no family contributions 
Qualifying for free or reduced lunch
Having substantial medical debt
Having student loan debt (there may be specific income thresholds for individual scholarship)
#4 Religion

This one may be surprising but there are scholarships for students of just about every religious background. And if you don’t consider yourself religious at all, no worries; identifying as “Agnostic” or “Atheist” can qualify you for a scholarship too! 

One word of advice when searching for religion-centered scholarships: the more specific you can get, the better. If you’re an Episcopalian Christian, for example, make sure to search for scholarships for Episcopalian students, not just Christian students in general. 

You can receive religion-based scholarship money for:

Being a follower of any faith (e.g. Christianity, Judaism, Islam, etc.)
Attending a religiously-affiliated high school
Being enrolled, accepted to, or planning to attend a religiously-affiliated college or university 
Being a member/volunteer at a faith-based organization (e.g. the National Association of Pastoral Musicians, The Salvation Army, HOPE International)
Attending seminary school
Being an LGBT UCC Member
Being a Unitarian Universalist Member
#5 Extracurricular Activities 

What you do with your free time, outside of the classroom, matters when it comes to scholarships. The term “extracurricular” simply means “beyond your academic curriculum” so don’t’ overlook your hobbies, interests, club memberships, and so on. Yes, even the fun things you enjoy the most can help you win a scholarship! 

Here are some examples of extracurricular activities for which you may find scholarships:

Sports:
You can certainly find scholarships for playing sports, but the umbrella category of “sports” is much more widely encompassing than that. There are scholarships out there for:
Playing of having played pretty much any sports you can think of (basketball, tennis, swim team, bowling leagues, etc.)
Participating in athletics with a disability 
Continuing your athletic career in college (D1, D2, D3, NAIA, Junior college, etc.)
Coaching sports or mentoring young athletes
Being an athletic trainer
Running a race or marathon 
Other school-based activities:
Speech/debate team
FBLA (Future Business Leaders of America)
Student Council/student government
Student newspaper
Any other activity or organization you participate in on school grounds!
Artistic endeavors: 
Playing an instrument
Participating in theatre (acting, directing, set design, costume design, etc.)
Dancing and choreographing 
Working at a radio station
Being a visual artist (painting, sculpting, photography, etc.)
Working in film in any capacity 
Writing or publishing poems, stories, articles, etc.
Hobbies/interests:
Chess, board games
Gardening
Online gaming
Programming
Fashion
Books/literature 
Camping/the outdoors
Values/Causes of interest to you:
Organ donation
Veganism/vegetarianism
Politics/political allegiances 
Animal rights
Civil rights/women’s rights/LGBTQ+ right
Environmentalism 
Memberships:
Fraternities/sororities
Boy Scouts/Girl Scouts/Eagle Scouts/etc.
Boys and Girls Club Member
ROTC (Reserve Officers’ Training Club)
YMCA member
Museum member 
#6 Location and State of College Attendance 

This category isn’t one you’ll necessarily have to make a list for, but nearly every state has its own programs for high schoolers who attend public colleges or universities in their home states. So make sure to search state-specific scholarships.

#7 Academic Circumstances 

Your performance in school will have a significant impact on the scholarships you’re eligible for since, well, college is academic by nature. Here are some academic attributes that can help you stand out to scholarship committees: 

A strong GPA (there are scholarships out there for different GPA thresholds. E.g. scholarships for students with 4.0 or higher GPAs)
Competitive test scores (ACT, SAT, AP, etc.)
Your admission into the National Honors Society (and other similar clubs for academic achievement)
Any awards for academic achievement that you’ve won
Your high grades in certain subject areas (e.g. there are scholarships for students who earn good grades in STEM classes).

It helps to think of your academic performance as an attribute that can help potentially  complement and strengthen other qualities. For example, if you’re a student-athlete with a high GPA or a first-generation college student with exceptional SAT scores, you’re likely a strong scholarship contender.

#8 Employment

Your job can also help you get scholarships, especially if you’re a graduate student applying to programs related to the job you currently do. For example, are you an ultrasound technician applying for medical school? There may be money out there just for you! 

Here are some job-related circumstances that could help you win scholarship money:

You’re an artist who has sold your work 
You contribute to your family’s household income
You are the head of your household
You are the child, dependent, or spouse of someone who works as: a first responder, an active police officer, a migrant worker, a teacher (and countless other professions)
You work at a job that supports underserved people and communities 
You work at or run a family business 
You’re a small business owner or independent contractor 
You work at a tech-startup

Here’s the thing: there are scholarships out there for people working in just about any field. So whatever you do to pay the bills (or whatever your parent or spouse may do), it pays (literally!) to look into scholarships related to your employment!

#9 Medical, Mental, and Physical Factors

Your mental and physical health is a huge factor in your ability to succeed in college. If your health has been compromised, challenged, or complicated in any way, there’s very likely a scholarship out there for you.

You may be eligible for scholarship money if you are currently or have been affected by:

ADHD
Autism
Learning disabilities
Birth injuries 
ALS 
Cancer
Diabetes
Depression, anxiety, and/or trauma 
Eating disorders
Car accident
Addiction 
Wheelchair use and/or any issues of accessibility
Autoimmune disorders
Paralysis 
Domestic violence 
Organ transplant

There are countless mental and physical circumstances that may qualify you for a scholarship so leave no stone unturned when it comes to finding this type of college funding.

#10 Military Affiliation

If you, a parent, or a spouse is involved in the military in any way, there are definitely many scholarship opportunities out there. Here are some of the most common criteria for finding a scholarship for military affiliations:

If you, a parent, or a spouse served in the United States Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Coast Guard, Air Force, or space Space Force
If you, a parent, or a spouse is a United States Veteran 
If you’re an American Legion Auxiliary member
If you’re in the ROTC or JROTC
If you’ve lost a loved one on account of military service
If you’re a member of the Navy Wives Club (or similar)
If you’re a Sea Cadet or Sea Scout

It is true that the military offers educational funding in exchange for service, and if you take advantage of this opportunity, great! We still highly encourage you to seek out scholarships, however, since the cost of college and cost of living while attending isn’t necessarily covered entirely by the military. It can never hurt to find more money for college!

#11 Volunteer Work

There are a multitude of scholarships out there that reward students for giving back to others. If you’ve dedicated time to causes that are important to you, then you should definitely seek out scholarships for volunteer work. 

Some scholarship-eligible volunteer work includes:

Being a tutor
Volunteering for AmeriCorps, the Peace Corps, Habitat for Humanity, etc.
Working for Teach for America
Helping election boards register people to vote or cast ballots on election day
Canvassing (unpaid) for politicians
Fundraising for non-profit foundations
Dedicating hours of community services to local organizations like homeless shelters, churches, food banks, etc.
Volunteering with the Boys and Girls Club of America
The “How to Win Scholarships Hack:” Attack From All Angles 

Once you’ve taken a full inventory of the attributes and circumstances that make you unique, search for scholarships related to all of them. When in doubt, it can’t hurt to search. You may be shocked how much money is out there for you when you start really breaking things down. 

Are you a female lacrosse player with a teacher parent and a 4.2 GPA who wants to attend school in Oregon? You’ll want to search for scholarships pertaining to each of those qualities! Are you a queer, Asian-American who participates in theatre and volunteers at a summer camp? Same thing! You get the idea.

Oh, and by the way, you may have noticed that some of these categories overlap a bit. For example, having a parent who serves in the military could be considered a family circumstance, a financial circumstance, or (obviously) a military affiliation. Don’t get too hung up on the type of circumstance or quality you have. We’ve organized these lists to help you get familiar with the WIDE range of scholarship out there and to assist you in diving deep into all of the scholarship-worthy things that make you you!

Want to Find The MOST Scholarships Possible? Use Scholly’s “Categories” Feature to Find The Best Matches for You

It’s no secret that Scholly Search is the boldest, baddest scholarship-matching platform out there! Our always-expanding, hyper-personalized database matches you with scholarships tailored just for you—saving you loads of time and energy in the search process. 

The best part is that Scholly Search includes a “Categories” section that allows you to set all kinds of parameters (like the hundreds listed above) about yourself when searching for scholarships. By creating a specific, vivid picture of yourself, we’re able to provide you with the the most accurate scholarship matches possible, which dramatically increases your chances of winning! 

Happy searching and good luck!

 

 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
One of the biggest and best scholarships available for students is the Gates Scholarship. In this post, we’re going to cover everything you need to know about the Gates Scholarship, including how to make yourself the strongest candidate possible for winning it. 

As a reminder, the Gates Scholarship is one of more than twenty thousand private scholarships available to students every year. If your interested in winning more than just the Gates Scholarship, consider signing up for the #1 rated scholarship app in the world, Scholly Search.

Without further ado, let’s look at how to win the Gates Scholarship! 

What is the Gates Scholarship?

The Gates Scholarship is awarded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, whose mission is to “ensure more children and young people survive and thrive.” The foundation seeks to eradicate poverty through access to high-quality healthcare and education. 

Prior to 2017, the Gates Scholarship was the Gates Millennium Scholars program, which served 20,000 students up to that point. 

The new Gates Scholarship funds the education of 300 Pell grant eligible, minority students a year with the aim of helping underserved students reach their maximum potential in life. The program will run 10 years (until 2027), and fully fund the education of 3,000 students total!

You can find more information about the Gates Scholarship here.  You can also check out the Gates Scholarship student FAQ page.  And read on for everything you need to know about applying for and winning it! 

What the Gates Scholarship Provides

So, what does a Gates scholarship winner actually win? 

The Gates scholarship awards full funding for the winner’s education (that is not already covered by other scholarships or grants). This funding is fully renewable for up to five years, which means your entire undergraduate education will be covered, providing you can finish it in that time.

Furthermore, the Gates Scholarship offers all kinds of other online support systems including mentorship, career counseling, a network of other Gates scholars, etc.

Pretty great deal, huh?

And by the way, the cost of education includes tuition, fees, room and board, textbooks, transportation, and (potentially) other costs associated with college. 

In other words: the Gates Scholarship is a HUGE win.

Eligibility for the Gates Scholarship

Okay, but you may be asking yourself, “Am I eligible for the Gates Scholarship?” Good question. 

According to the newest eligibility guidelines, you’ll need to be:
A high school senior
A minority student, which is this case refers to being one of the following ethnicities: African American, American Indian/Native Alaskan, Asian/Pacific Islander American, and/or Hispanic American
Eligible for a Pell grant, which are awarded to undergraduate students who qualify for financial aid 
A US citizen, national, or permanent resident
In good academic standing with a GPA of 3.3 out of 4.0 on a cumulative, weighted scale
Here are a few more key facts about eligibility:
If you received your GED instead of a high school diploma you are not eligible to apply.
You must be attending an accredited, 4-year college or university in the United States or Puerto Rico. Community colleges are included, but you must be able to prove you’re enrolling as a freshman in a 4-year program.
If you’re seeking an Associate’s Degree from a 2-year college before transferring to a 4-year university, you are not eligible to apply.

Sound like you? Read on! 

Application Steps for the Gates Scholarship

If you’re eligible for the Gates scholarship, hooray! Now let’s take a look at what you’ll actually need to apply and the necessary steps to take.

#1 Gather the following information:
Your current academic information: your high school name and address, your transcripts, GPA, class rank, and SAT and/or ACT scores
Your college information: your acceptance letter and your financial aid award letter (btw: in order to receive financial aid you will need to fill out a FAFSA. Check out our complete guide to filling out your FAFSA for help). Note that if you haven’t been accepted anywhere yet, that’s okay. But by the final stage of the application process, you’ll need to provide this verification.
You family’s financial information: your dependent or independent status and your parents’ or guardians’ personal gross income for the previous year
You extracurricular information: this includes employment, sports or clubs, community service, leadership roles, etc. Make sure to have as much information on hand about these activities as possible, including names, dates, and descriptions associated with each.
#2 Create a TGS profile 

In order to log in and apply, you’ll need to create a TGS account and start a personal profile. Everything you submit for the Gates Scholarship will be through this portal.

It may seem obvious, but on the first page, select “student” from the drop down menu and then select and confirm a password of your choice. It’s a super simple process, but necessary for proceeding with your application. You will not be able to apply through any other sites or by mail.

#3 Familiarize yourself with the application phases
In phase one of the application—which you’ll automatically be directed to upon signing up—all you’ll need to do is fill out a questionnaire about yourself. This step is also very simple, and if you’ve gathered the information mentioned above it won’t take long at all to enter it. 
If you are selected to advance to phase 2 of the application as a semi-finalist, congrats! (FYI: 2,000 students will be chosen to move on at this juncture). You’ll be notified and provided an additional application to complete. This portion of the application will require you to: complete another, more in-depth questionnaire, submit your updated transcripts, provide letters of recommendation (typically 2), and complete several short essays. Unfortunately, essay questions change annually and are not released until you make it to this step, but we’ll provide you more advice about scholarship essays shortly!
If you’re one of the lucky 600 students who make it round 3, BIG congrats! This means you’re a finalist and will be given an interview with the selection committee.
The Gates Scholarship Timeline

The exact dates vary year to year, but here’s the general timeline:

July: The Gates Scholarship application opens! 

September: Application deadline for phase 1

December: Semi-finalists are announced and the phase 2 application opens for all those who are progressing as semi-finalists

January: Application deadline for phase 2

March: Finalists are announced and interviews are scheduled

April: Scholarship winners are announced! 

August/September: Fall scholarship money is disbursed to all winners

For reference, the most recent Gates Scholarship opened July 15 and the first deadline was September 15. You can refer back to the previous timeline here.

Even if it seems far off, now would be an excellent time to start preparing for the next open application season! 

Tips and Strategies for Winning the Gates Scholarship
Following the Gates “Ideal Candidate” Guidelines

The Gates Scholarship board explains exactly what they consider an ideal candidate, which is a student who:

Possesses an outstanding high school record, including a high GPA and class ranking in the top 10% of their graduating class
Consistently demonstrates strong leadership through community service and/or extracurricular activities 
Exudes “exceptional personal success skills” like emotional maturity, motivation, motivation and perseverance despite challenges and setbacks, etc.
Get a Jumpstart on Everything

Winning the Gates Scholarship is truly a life-changing event, and because of that, it’s a super competitive pool. This means if you want a fighting chance of winning, you’ll want to be a strong applicant with high grades… and you’ll want to get on this early in your high school career. 

Because here’s the thing about GPAs: they are actually quite hard to change substantially after your sophomore year. So you’ll want to get a jump start on getting good grades as early as freshman year so that your cumulative GPA for all four years is high when you apply. 

The early bird also gets the worm when it comes to the actual application process. At Scholly, we’re big fans of starting an application as soon as it becomes available. This gives you enough time to gather the necessary information, reflect a bit, make any changes, and get tech support if necessary. 

This is especially important if you make it to phase 2 of the competition and have to write essay responses. Start brainstorming and drafting as early as possible to give yourself ample time to edit and upload them.

Give Back and Demonstrate Leadership

The Gates Scholarship committee really wants to see that you are a person of service—an individual genuinely and whole-heartedly concerned with the wellbeing of others and in taking action to make change in the world.

It’s one thing to have a list of extracurricular and volunteer activities listed on your resume and it’s another to actually live into these passions. Remember that if you advance to rounds 2 and 3, you’ll likely have to write and talk in depth about the causes that are important to you and why. 

So we encourage you to get curious and adventurous (again, as early on as possible). Try to find a type of community service that actually speaks to you, not just one that looks good on paper. Are you passionate about animal rights? The environment? LGBTQ+ progress? Look for groups in your school and your community where you get involved. If you don’t know where to start, talk to a teacher, college counselor, or guidance counselor about your interests and they’ll help point you in the right direction.

Trying a lot of different things is okay, but you’ll also want to show that you can consistently dedicate yourself to the things you care most about. Try to find at least one or two activities or causes and stick to them over the course of your high school career.

Whenever possible, work up to leadership roles at any jobs, activities, or volunteer projects. Are you captain of your speech team? A shift leader at a local restaurant? A tutor who helps others? Your ability to demonstrate leadership and mentorship will help your application stand out. 

Emphasize What Makes You Unique

300 students a year win the Gates Scholarship, which is pretty amazing. But the application pool is still… BIG. While there’s no definite number released on how many applicants apply each year, the semi-finalist pool alone is made up of 20,000 students. That means 1.5% of students who make it as far as the semifinalist phase will win. 

So long story short, you’ll need to stand out. In your questionnaire (and later, in your essays), you’ll want to focus on the things that make you uniquely you. You can include and discuss attributes such as your cultural background, your gender identity, your passions (the more unique, the better), and your values. 

If you move on to become a semifinalist or finalist, you’ll want to spend some time really reflecting on your future aspirations and goals, especially those in service of creating a better world for all. The more specific, the better. Will you use your law degree to advocate for equal pay for all? Will you become a nurse to help bring adequate healthcare to communities in struggle?

Let’s be clear: you won’t have to elaborate too much on these subjects during your initial application process. But we highly suggest you’ve given them some thought so that you’re better prepared if you advance!  

Get Strong Letters of Recommendation

If you become a semifinalist, you’ll need to supply letters of recommendation from teachers or guidance counselors. 

We can’t emphasize this enough: ask for your letters of recommendation early—as soon as you submit your initial application. If you don’t advance as a semifinalist, that’s ok! These letters can be re-purposed and used for other scholarship applications or similar. This is important because you’ll want to give your recommenders time to write thoughtful, reflective essays that paint a vivid picture of who you are and why you should win.

Also, make sure to ask people who know you well and and can genuinely speak to your ability, your potential, and your personal growth over a period of time. The better your recommenders know you, the more personal and captivating their letters will be, which will increase your chances of winning! 

Check out this guide on how to ask for a letter of recommendation that will help you receive the best letter possible in a timely fashion. You can also send your teacher or guidance counselor this guide on how to write a recommendation letter for scholarship applications! 

Slay the Essays

If you make it to the semi-finalist round, your essays are, without a doubt, THE most crucial part of your application. It’s through your essays that you’ll be able to create a complex and compelling portrait of who you are and what you stand for. 

We strongly recommend that you take a look at this piece on how to write a scholarship essay that will help you win big for tons of tips and strategies for scholarship essay writing. 

Here are a few “golden nugget” tips from it:

Reach each question thoroughly and make sure you understand exactly what is being asked. It may sound silly, but we’re huge fans of reading out loud so you don’t miss anything. Break down each question into parts: are there sub-questions? It can help to print the questions and underline each idea you have to respond to.
Trim the fat. That means you’ll want to keep your essay as tailored as possible, cutting out all redundant words and phrases as well as any ideas or thoughts that don’t directly apply to the prompt. 
Be YOU. Communicate passion for the topic at hand. You’ll want to be as professional as possible, but don’t be afraid to speak in your own voice and tone. Think: the way you’d talk to a teacher you know very well and respect.
Proofread your essay! More than once. And ideally, have someone else proofread it as well. You can also use a tool like Grammarly that checks and improves your spelling, grammar, word choice, sentence structure, and more! 

While the Gates scholarship essays change yearly and aren’t shared with you until you become a semi-finalist, most scholarship essays center around common themes like:

Your goals for the future
How you intend you make your dreams a reality 
Your strongest qualities and how they serve you and others
What winning the scholarship would mean to you and how it would change your life
Your strongest values 
Aspects of your identity (e.g. your race, class, gender, etc.) that have shaped your life
How you’ve overcome certain hardships in your life
An event or circumstance that has had significant impact on your life and shaped who you are

Reflecting and taking some notes on some or all of these topics will be incredibly helpful if you become a semi-finalist!

Prepare for an interview…even if getting one is a long-shot

Have you ever heard the saying, “Dress for the job you want”? This piece of advice is sort of like that. 

You’ll want to look forward and start preparing for an interview (which are offered in person and via video chat) months in advance, even before you know if you’ll get one

Why? Because this way you’ll be beyond prepared if and when you do get an interview! And if you don’t, we guarantee that your interview prep will benefit you in some other way (for example, for another scholarship, college acceptance, or a job you want). 

There’s no exact formula to nailing an interview, but these are some good scholarship interview tips to keep in mind. 

According to one Gates Scholarship winner, he was asked about his extracurricular activities in depth and was also asked “Is there anything you’d like to add that was not reflected in your application?”

That applicant says he believes his overall passion about his interests and focus on his innovative nature is what landed him the scholarship. In his recounting of his interview, he shares that he explained in detail to the interviewer how he improved the design of the school newspaper and built out the school’s tennis team substantially. 

Beyond the Gates Scholarship: Want Even MORE Scholarship Opportunities?!

So now you know how to win the Gates Scholarship. If you’re eligible, we really hope you apply! But also keep in mind that there are hundreds of thousands of other scholarships out there for you!

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how to graduate debt free and win other scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship and the Dell Scholarship.

Good luck!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
The Dell Scholars Program, offered by the Michael & Susan Dell Foundation, is a college scholarship plus so much more. Founded in 2004, the Dell Scholars Program is a scholarship and college completion program that helps students from underserved communities achieve their academic dreams. 

What’s amazing about the Dell Scholarship is that it’s not just a check to pay for college—it’s a robust support system that provides resources to students over the course of their college career and helps ensure that they earn a degree in their chosen field.

The mission of the program is to provide academic awards and opportunities to students who have overcome hardships or had barriers to academic success, but who demonstrate drive and promise. Many are the first in their families to go to college. You can read more about the Dell Scholars Program, including the core beliefs, but one of our personal favorites is:

“Students who challenge themselves academically can succeed in college, even if they don’t stand out based on traditional evaluation criteria like GPAs, test scores, and extracurricular activities”

To date, the Dell Scholars Program has helped more than 4,800 scholars. Normally, about only 20% of students who fit the Dell profile graduate college in 6 or less years. But 80% of Dell Scholars graduate in that time! 

Interested in becoming a Dell Scholar? Read on for everything you need to know about the program—including how to increase your chances of winning!

What Does the Dell Scholarship Offer?

The goal of the Dell Scholarship Program is to help students fund college and empower them over the course of their academic journey. 

As a Dell Scholar, you’ll receive individualized support systems, complete with the necessary resources tailored to you. You’ll also be part of an extensive support network made up of other students, peer mentors, and Dell Scholars staff. 

Additionally, you’re given immense flexibility regarding what you can use your award money for.

Specifically, the Dell Scholars Program offers:

A $20,000 scholarship (available for at least 6 years). The funds can be used to pay tuition and fees for undergraduate programs, graduate school, student loan repayment, study abroad opportunities and/or internship stipends! 
Personalized support resources that help reduce the academic, financial, and emotional stressors that can make it difficult to complete college
A laptop with a 4-year warranty
Chegg credits ($500 annually for four years) to be used for textbook purchases and rentals and/or textbook solutions (via Chegg Study)
Access to the Scholars Resources Network which connects students and their families to resources for stress management, debt management, childcare, etc.
A teletherapy service that connects students to professional counseling

The Dell Scholars Program aims to offer students consistent and ongoing support from the day they win the scholarship to the day they graduate, making it one of the most life-changing scholarship opportunities out there!

The Dell Scholarship Timeline

The official dates for the Dell Scholarship application in 2022 haven’t been released yet. But based on the previous application cycles, you can expect the following timeline: 

October 1: Application opens
December 1: Application deadline
December 10: Semifinalists announced
End of January: Semifinalist materials due
Beginning of March: Dell scholarship winners are announced
Eligibility for the Dell Scholarship Program

It’s pretty clear that the Dell Scholarship is an incredible opportunity, but are you eligible for it? 

The first thing to know is that the Dell Scholars Program isn’t as concerned with your GPA or standardized test scores as many other scholarships. They’re looking for determination and promise, traits that aren’t always reflected on your academic record.

So if you want to call yourself a Dell Scholar, you’ll need to meet the following eligibility requirements:

Be a U.S citizen
Participate in a Dell Scholars approved college readiness program during your junior and senior years in high school 
Graduate from an accredited high school this year
Have a GPA of 2.4+
Be eligible to receive a Federal Pell Grant in your first year of college (and demonstrate a need for financial assistance) 
Plan to enroll full-time in a bachelor’s program at an accredited higher education institution the fall semester after you graduate from high school  
Application Requirements for the Dell Scholarship

The first step is completing the online Dell Scholars application (tips for filling this out are below!). To complete this application, you will need to know the following information:

Your personal information (name, address, phone number, email, etc.)
GPA
High school transcript information (courses, grades). At this stage, you only need to pull information from your transcripts; you won’t need to submit them until you’re a semi-finalist
Top 3 college choices 
ACT and SAT test scores
Intended major
Basic information about your parents (e.g. their employment status, marital status, etc.)
Contact information for a personal recommender (who will not be contacted unless you advance to a semi-finalist)

Once you’ve submitted your application, you may be notified that you’ve been selected as a semi-finalist (sweet!). If this is the case, here is what you’ll need to provide:

An official copy of your high school transcript 
A complete Student Aid Report (SAR), which is generated by filling out a FAFSA (here’s more information on how to complete a FAFSA). FAFSA stands for Free Application or Federal Student Aid, and it’s your first step to receiving financial aid from the government.
An online recommendation

Once submitted, a committee will review all of your application materials and make a final decision.

Tips and Strategies For Winning the Dell Scholarship
Review the Sample Application Thoroughly

On their website, you’ll find a sample Dell Scholars application that you can review before it’s actually time to fill it out. The more familiar you are with it, the better able you’ll be to fill it out accurately and in a timely manner.

Reviewing the sample application ahead of time will help you determine what information you still have to gather and will help familiarize you with the essay prompts (more on this in a moment).

Possess the Dell “GPA”

The Dell Scholars Program requires a 2.4 minimum GPA, but it looks for something much deeper than that in students. They believe that potential is reflected in more than just numbers, and have created their own, unique “GPA.”

To be a strong candidate, you should demonstrate the following “GPA”:

GRIT by overcoming personal challenges in your life related to your family, school, or community

POTENTIAL by participating in a college readiness programs and seeking out academic rigor

AMBITION by dreaming of obtaining a college degree

These attributes constitute the backbone of your entire application. If you show that you possess these qualities, you’ll have a much greater chance of winning!

Nail the Short Essays

Like many scholarships applications, this one asks you to write several short scholarship essays.  These essays require thoughtfulness and effort, but they’re a fantastic way to demonstrate your “GPA” (girt, potential, and ambition). The stronger your essays, the more you’ll stand out.

There are 6 brief essay prompts to answer, each with a character limit of 1200-1800 characters. That’s an average of about 250 word, or about one paged typed, double-spaced.

It may sound like a lot of writing, but each essays isn’t very long. Also, keep in mind that these character counts are maximums, meaning you can write less if you’d like. What this means is that you will have to get to the point quickly and stay focused on answering the question at hand.

Here are a few quick essay writing tips:

Read each of the questions thoroughly so you are sure you understand what is being asked. It really helps to read them out loud! Most of these questions have 2 parts, so read carefully, and make sure to address all sub-questions.
Answer each question as succinctly as possible, trimming any unnecessary words or details, and be as specific as possible.
Be honest, be passionate, and be yourself in your essays. This is your chance to shine!
Make sure to proofread and edit your essays before you submit them!

Want more tips? Here’s some great advice for writing scholarship essays that will help you win big.

Now let’s take a quick look at each of the essays included on Dells Scholars application.

#1 College major essay

Prompt: What inspired you to choose this major and study the degree you are planning to enroll in? How do you plan to use that degree to fulfill your goals for after college graduation?

For this essay, make sure to create a vivid picture of exactly what you’d like to use your degree for. Avoid overly broad or general responses like “changing the world” or “helping people.” HOW would you do these things?

Include specific career paths you’re interested in.  For example, instead of saying you’d like to become a nurse, tell the readers what kind of nurse. Do you want to work with children? The elderly? Physical therapy patients recovering from sports-related injuries? Be precise in illustrating what your future will look like with the degree of your choice.

#2 2-year college essay

Prompt: Please tell us the reasons you are considering a 2-yr college as one of your top 3 college choices

Okay but what if you weren’t considering a 2-year college? Because the Dell Scholars application includes this question, we recommend that you include at least one 2-year college on your list of choices. Plus, it’s always a good idea to apply to a variety of school types.

There are TONS of reasons why a 2-year college is a great choice:

They’re often close to home/easy to commute to
They offer flexible class schedules for students who also hold jobs
The tuition is often drastically more affordable than at 4-year colleges
It can be much easier to transfer to the 4-year college of your choice after you’ve taken some coursework at a 2-year college
2-year colleges give you a chance to explore your interests before committing to a 4-year university
#3 Top schools essay

Prompt: Please tell us what reasons you considered in selecting each of these schools as your top choices. Elaborate on the factors you considered, such as academic fit and financial affordability.

On your application, you will choose 3 schools from a drop-down menu and this essay provides you a chance to explain why you’re applying to each.

When writing about “academic fit,” you can consider:

Specific courses you would like to take and/or instructors you would like to work with
Academic support systems available (like writing centers, peer tutors, etc.)
Programs that are particularly strong at a given school or majors that aren’t offered elsewhere
The opportunity to participate in internships
Academic organizations or clubs on campus
Resources like computer labs or research labs

Remember, avoid vague statements like, “X school has a great literature program.” Instead, elaborate on the aspects of the program that appeal to you. We suggest that you take a close look at each of the program websites at the schools you’re applying to for more information.

#4 Personal challenges essay

Prompt: Describe the most significant challenges you may face transitioning to and while in college and what steps you may take to address those challenges. As appropriate, include skills/strategies you learned in your College Readiness Program that have prepared you to be successful in college.

There are many universal challenges when transitioning to college. For instance, dealing with time management, stress management, test anxiety, etc. You can discuss these, but also include more personal challenges if possible. Do you have any learning disabilities? Health issues? Will transportation to and from classes be challenging?

In the second part of your response, precisely explain the techniques you’ve found most helpful in high school that you anticipate using in college. Do you keep a detailed assignment notebook? Use active reading strategies? What’s the #1 tip you’d give another student for juggling the challenges of school?

#5 Responsibilities essay

Prompt: Please provide more detail about either your home, work, or volunteer responsibilities (whichever you spend the most time doing) and how you make sure it doesn’t prevent you from completing your school work.

We all have incredibly busy lives, so you’ll want to make sure you paint a clear, detailed picture of what your daily obligations look like. Whether you care for your younger siblings, work part-time on evenings and weekends, or volunteer at your church, make sure to include any and all responsibilities that fall on you.

In the second part of this response, provide a specific, actionable way you will prioritize your school work. Don’t just say, “I will make sure to complete all of my school work.” Instead, tell the readers how you will do so. Do you have a special, quite place to study? A schedule you intend to implement? The essays readers want to see grit and ambition, so share the best strategies you’ve got!

#6 Financial hardships essay

Prompt: Describe the financial hardships you had to overcome in your life thus far (including housing, living, or family circumstances) and how you plan to manage any ongoing financial responsibilities you’ll have while in college. (When writing your essays, please note that if you write about child abuse or neglect, the Dell Scholars program may be required to report the information to the appropriate child protective services agency.)

Financial hardship is a sensitive topic, but it’s nothing to be ashamed about. Don’t be afraid to include all of the factors that have made your financial situation challenging. The key here is honesty.

And again, you’ll need to include a plan for how you’ll manage financial hardship during college.

Overall, note that for all of these essays there are really two parts: 1) explaining a situation, and 2) either elaborating on it with examples, or providing a plan of action.

Know Your Federal and State Aid Eligibility

The Dell Scholars application will ask about your eligibility to the following government support programs. It will help to have this information ready to go:

Free or Reduced Cost Lunch Program (example: National School Lunch Program (NSLP)) 
Food Stamps/EBT or other food assistance program
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC)
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF)
Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) or other utility assistance programs
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
Reduced Housing/Housing Assistance (example: HUD Section 8)
Social Security Death or Disability (not standard retirement)
State or Federal Health Insurance (example: MediCal, CHIP)
The Medicaid joint federal and state program

If you don’t know offhand if you’re eligible for any of these programs, the first step is to talk to your parents or guardians, who may have a better idea.

You can also use this website about government benefits to determine which federal or state aid you qualify for.

Choose Your Personal Recommendation Wisely

For the first stage of the application process, you will only have to include your recommender’s personal information. If you proceed, they will be contacted for a formal recommendation.

Choosing the right person is key, because they’ll provide insight about you from a different perspective.

Our #1 piece of advice for choosing a recommender is to select an individual who knows you well. This person should be able to speak to BOTH your academic potential and your character. A teacher or school counselor is always a good choice.

Your recommender must be at least 21 years old and can’t be related to you.

We also suggest that you choose someone with excellent written and verbal communication skills, who will do a good job articulating your strengths as a candidate!

Finally, make sure to ask your recommender ahead of time if they are willing to help you in this way, so they’re not surprised if the Dell Scholars Program reaches out to them! It’s a good idea to provide them with your resume or a list of your accomplishments to ensure they know how to write a strong scholarship recommendation letter.

Want Even MORE Scholarship Opportunities? Look No Further! 

The Dell Scholars Program is one of the best scholarships out there, but it’s definitely competitive. The good news is that there are TONS of other scholarships out there you can win, and Scholly will help you find them!

Scholly Search is a hyper-personalized scholarship database that finds and matches you with scholarships tailored just to you based on all of your unique qualities. This saves you the headache of digging for scholarships and drastically increases your chances of winning!

You can also check out our expert tips for winning scholarships and guides on how to win other competitive scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship and the Burger King Scholarship.

Good luck and happy applying!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Here’s What Financial Literacy Means and Why it’s Important

“Financial literacy” has become quite the buzzword, but what does it actually mean? 

In short, financial literacy means knowing how to manage money wisely. Managing your finances is a lifelong journey and the specifics can vary from person to person. That said, there are a number of basic skills that can boost anyone’s financial literacy. We also recommend that you check out these hot money saving tips to use daily!

Financial literacy is important because life is full of twists and turns. 

Emergencies and unexpected expenses will come up. Fun opportunities that you won’t want to miss will present themselves to you. As you get older, the things you want will very likely be more expensive and bigger investments (for example, buying a house, having children, etc.). And eventually, one day, you will want to retire and stop working to earn a living.

All of these things take planning, which is where financial literacy comes in. The better your financial literacy, the more money in your pocket—which means overall greater security in life. 

So without further ado, let’s take a look at some of the simple but powerful ways you can start improving your financial literacy! 

Our Favorite Ways to Improve Your Financial Literacy
1. Know Yourself

In order to change or improve your financial situation, you’ll have to have a strong sense of what your financial situation looks like. 

The first thing to do is get really familiar with your spending habits. Especially in the age of debit cards and Venmo, most of us spend our money without actually realizing how much we’re spending and what we’re spending it on. Use your banking apps or print out your bank statement and go through it with multi-colored pens. How much are you spending a month on eating out? What about on gas or transportation? Once you know how much you’re currently spending, you can begin assessing what needs to be adjusted. You may be really surprised about what you can trim!

The second thing you need to do (and this can be scary) is check your credit score. Your credit score is assigned to you based on your financial history and your relationship to paying off debts. A good credit score is necessary for a lot of things in life: getting a loan, buying a car, renting an apartment, and so on. Your credit report will also include bill payments you’ve made, outstanding balances in your name, your debt-to-income ratio, etc. Knowing your credit score is crucial for knowing what kinds of financial options you currently have (e.g. if you qualify for a loan) and for knowing where you can improve your financial patterns. 

This is a solid overview of credit scores as well as a tutorial on how to check and monitor your credit score so that you best manage your public financial records. Several credit reporting agencies or your own bank will allow you to check your score for free! Just make sure to do your research so that you aren’t being charged or negatively affected for checking your score.

2. Budget

If you want to be savvy with money you absolutely must, must, must (did we say must?) make a budget. What exactly IS a budget? A budget is an estimated amount of income and expenses for a given amount of time. So, for example, a monthly budget is an organized list of all incoming and outgoing money for the duration of that month.

3 Keys to budgeting:

Identify fixed and variable expenses 

Fixed expenses are monthly expenses that stay the same every month: rent, your car payment, most bills, your student loan payment, etc. (Side note: you could be eligible for student loan forgiveness—read on!)

Variable expenses are monthly expenses that will fluctuate. For example, groceries, household supplies, gas, etc. 

Track your spending for 3 months

Since so many expenses in life are variable, it’s important to study your spending habits over a longer period of time, ideally for about 3 months (you can also look back over 3 or more months of bank statements). Over this time, determine the average amount you spend per month on variable expenses, rounding up to account for months that may be a tad bit higher. 

Once you’ve determined an amount for your average variable expenses, add this number to your fixed expenses and voila! You have your total monthly expenses. 

Determine your income

If you’ve got a fixed income, this part is easy-peasy. If you don’t (for example, if you’re an independent contractor who picks up various gigs or if you work on primarily tips), you’ll want to do the same thing you did for variable expenses and track your income over a period of time to determine an average. When in doubt, to play it safe, you can always round your average monthly income number down, and anything above that number is a surplus.

Set your budget 

Once you have both your expenses and your income determined, you can subtract your expenses from your income. With the number you have left, deduct a portion to set aside in savings (more on this in just a moment). 

The amount of money you have after you deduct your expenses should then be divided into 4, which will give you your weekly budget. You can even go on to divide that number by 7 if you’d like, determining your daily budget.

3. Save

Always set aside a portion of your income to contribute to your savings account (which you need), even if it’s a small portion that varies month to month. Having money to fall back on in case of emergencies is critical. How much you put away also depends on your goals, and studies vary on how much you should put into savings a month, but the general rule of thumb is 20% of your income. 

If you can’t swing 20%, just make sure to put something away, aiming for 20% whenever possible.

Here’s a great resource on the different types of savings accounts so you can choose which is best for you! When putting your money into savings, it’s best to shop around and weigh out your options, which involves understanding interest rates and how they’re applied to the money in your account. The higher the interest, the more money you’ll earn over time.

4. Establish Credit (But Beware of Racking it Up!)

Your credit score is generated, in large part, by your ability to pay your bills and to pay back debt on time. If you don’t have any bills or any debt, it will actually be hard to establish good credit. Therefore, it can be a good idea to establish credit by taking out a line of credit on a card and then paying it back responsibly.

A credit line, in essence, is like a loan given to you up front (in the form of a credit card) that you’ll need to pay back, usually at a minimum monthly fee. 

If you keep your balance low and make your payment on time every month, your credit score will thrive. But if you let your balance accrue too high, or make late payments, your credit is at great risk. And remember, there’s almost always an interest rate attached to your credit line, meaning that you’re paying back additional money on top of what you actually owe in exchange for the advance on the money. However, you can avoid the interest by making sure you pay off your credit start statement by the due date each month!

So remember, having a credit line can be a great thing, but proceed with caution! If you’re just starting out, check out our guide on ways to build credit fast.

5. Protect Yourself

In the digital age, where most of our banking is done online, it’s imperative to protect yourself against bank account hacking and identity theft. This is a to-the-point but highly comprehensive overview of how to prevent identity theft, but here are some of the quickest, easiest ways you can safeguard your money from illegal access to it:

Update your passwords frequently and follow all password parameters on sites (the more complicated the password the harder it is to hack your account).
NEVER provide personal information like your bank account number or social security number online or over the phone unless you are CERTAIN you are dealing with a trusted source. When in doubt, don’t do it!
Be very mindful of what you click on on the internet. Pop-up ads are a huge no-no.
Check your credit frequently.
Set up fraud alerts or account freezes with credit bureaus (more on that here).
Subscribe to an identity theft protection service.
6. Seek Advice

If you’re feeling overwhelmed about money, seek out the wisdom of those who have more developed financial literacy than you do right now. A trusted family member is a great place to start. Or, you can speak with a financial advisor, whose job it is to help you manage your money safely. This is a great overview of how a financial advisor can help and how you can find the right one for you.

7. Self Educate

If you’re pretty good with money, but would love some additional insight or inspiration for how to save bigger and invest better, there are plenty of “financial gurus” out there.

There are some pretty universally trusted financial experts, including Suze Orman, who has many books and other resources for helping people get out and stay out of debt. Her website also very neatly breaks down money management into various, streamlined categories, so you can find information that pertains to you quickly.

8. Set Goals

It’s always easier to accomplish something when you have a set goal or destination in mind! Whether you’re saving up for your dream vacation, looking to pay off your student loans entirely, planning to buy a home, etc., you’ll be much more inclined to manage your money better if you know what you plan to do with it. Here’s a resource we like on how to set financial goals, with some common great ideas for financial goals to get you motivated!

9. Do a Daily Check-In

Coming somewhat full-circle to #1 (knowing yourself), it’s a really good idea to stay on top of your finances by taking a peek at them every day. You don’t need more than 5 minutes to check all accounts so that you’re exactly aware of how much money you have and what you’ve spend money on most recently.

It’s all too easy to get busy, swipe away on that debit card as you rack up purchases, and then look at your account in shock. If you start your day by taking a quick inventory of your finances, you’re much more likely to spend responsibly!

10. Be Smart About Student Loans

Last but not least, our personal favorite tip for improving your financial literacy: managing your student loan debt! One of the best ways to do so is the avoid or reduce student loan debt by winning scholarships (money you don’t have to pay back) for college tuition and other expenses!

Check out our trusted guide on how to build a scholarship toolbox in order to save BIG on college tuition. You can also check out all of our scholarship and student debt payoff opportunities, which we update frequently!

Want to Make College Even More Affordable?

Check out Scholly Search, our adaptive, hyper-personalized scholarship-matching database that helps you find the MOST money for school possible. Here’s a great overview of Scholly Search’s new features that make scholarship searching even quicker and easier!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
February is Black History Month. It’s a time to celebrate the achievements of African Americans and their role in shaping the history of the United States and Canada. 

At Scholly, we honor the hard hard work, sacrifices, and accomplishments of the Black community all year round. And Black History Month is a great occasion to share a few of our favorite scholarships specifically for African American students!  

So, in this post, you’ll find quick facts on 7 scholarships for African American students that, to date, are currently accepting applications. 

Following those scholarships, we’ll also be sharing 5 scholarship tips for African American students who want to increase their chances of winning big and cutting down their costs for college.

Let’s get right to it!

7 Scholarships for African American Students

Here are 7 of our favorite scholarships for African American students that are currently accepting applications! For more information on each, click the name of the scholarship.

#1 National Black McDonald’s & Dr. Pepper Scholarship

This scholarship is offered through the combined financial efforts of the Thurgood Marshall College Fund (TMCF), the National Black McDonald’s Operators Association, and Dr. Pepper. It is awarded to students attending historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs). 

Application Deadline

March 22, 2021

Award Amount
12 students will win a scholarship worth $5,000
Eligibility Requirements

You’re eligible for the National Black McDonald’s & Dr. Pepper Scholarship if you: 

Enrolled full-time as a sophomore, junior or senior at an HBCU
Are a U.S. citizen or legal resident
Have a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or above
Are open to Marketing, Sales, Operations, Entrepreneurship and other Business related majors
Have leadership experience
Demonstrate financial need
Application Materials

To apply for the National Black McDonald’s & Dr. Pepper Scholarship, you’ll need to submit an application that includes: 

Your FAFSA Student Aid Report (SAR)
The email address of someone who can complete a character reference
A copy of your recent transcripts
A 1-minute video statement about your experience with leadership, thoughts on diversity in the workplace, and career interests within business management or hospitality management
#2 Blacks at Microsoft Scholarship

Microsoft is proud to offer this scholarship to students of African descent interested in pursuing a degree in a technology-related field.

Application Deadline

March 31, 2021 11:59 PM Pacific Time

Award Amount
4 students will win scholarships worth $20,000 distributed over 4 years ($5,000 per year)
8 students will win scholarships worth $10,000 distributed over 2 years ($5,000 per year)
Up to 15 students will win one-time scholarships worth  $1,000
Eligibility Requirements

You’re eligible for the Blacks at Microsoft Scholarship if you: 

Are a US-based high school senior of African descent (e.g. African American, Nigerian, Ethiopian, etc.) 
Plan to attend a four-year college or university immediately following your high school graduation
Have at least a 3.3 cumulative GPA
Require financial assistance to attend college
Can demonstrate a passion for technology
Plan to pursue a bachelor’s degree in engineering, computer science, computer information systems, or certain business programs (e.g. finance, business administration, or marketing).
Application Materials

To apply for the Blacks at Microsoft Scholarship, you’ll need to submit an application that includes: 

2 letters of recommendation
Your resume
A color photo of yourself
Your academic transcript
2 personal essays 
#3 Mae & Mary Legacy Foundation, Inc. Scholarship

The Mae and Mary Legacy Foundation is an educational non-profit organization committed to unifying communities and giving back to African American students entering the medical and healthcare professions.

Application Deadline

April 30, 2021 11:59 PM EST

Award Amount

Varies annually

Eligibility Requirements

You’re eligible for the Mae & Mary Legacy Foundation, Inc. Scholarship if you:

Are an African American graduating high school senior 
Plan to attend a two/four-year college or university to pursue a career in healthcare
Are a U.S. citizen 
Application Materials

To apply for the Mae & Mary Legacy Foundation, Inc. Scholarship, you’ll need to submit an application that includes:

2 letters of recommendation
One personal essay
A cover letter
Your resume
A recent photo of yourself
Your academic transcript
A copy of a college acceptance letter (if available) 
#4 A. Grace Lee Mims Vocal Scholarship

The Cleveland Foundation offers this scholarship to help African American students pursuing graduate-level study in vocal performance or music education, with an emphasis on voice.

Application Deadline

March 15, 2021

Award Amount

$10,000 (renewable for up to 2 years)

Eligibility Requirements

You’re eligible for the A. Grace Lee Mims Vocal Scholarship if you:

Are an African American student enrolled full time at a recognized and accredited institution (conservatory, college, university, etc.) for graduate-level course work toward a master’s or doctoral degree in vocal performance or music education, with an emphasis on voice, in order to perpetuate the singing of the Negro spiritual through performance and/or teaching
Application Materials

To apply for the A. Grace Lee Mims Vocal Scholarship, you’ll need to submit an application that includes:

3 letters of recommendation
A recording of a recent performance
A personal statement
A photo of yourself
A detailed budget for your academic year’s educational expenses including scholarships, fellowships, grants, and loans
#5 Carrington-Philbert Scholarship

Malcolm Carrington and Sherwin Bridgewater founded this scholarship to help African American students entering their first year of college. 

Application Deadline

May 1, 2021

Scholarship Award Amount

$2,500 (to at least one student)

Eligibility Requirements

You’re eligible for the Carrington-Philbert Scholarship if you:

Are an African-American high-school senior planning to attend a U.S. two-year community college or a four-year college in the upcoming academic year 
Application Materials

To apply for the Carrington-Philbert Scholarship, you’ll need to submit an application that includes:

Your high school transcripts
A headshot photo
A personal essay
1 letter of recommendation
#6 KnowBe4 Scholarship for Black Americans in Cybersecurity

KnowBe4 is an information security company. They provide this scholarship for Black American students pursuing, or planning to pursue, a degree with a focus on cybersecurity or information assurance.

Application Deadline

April 19, 2021 

Scholarship Award Amount

$10,000 for tuition, fees, books, and electronics, up to $3,000 for on-campus housing, and an (ISC)2 certification education package

Eligibility Requirements

You’re eligible for the KnowBe4 Scholarship if you:

Are a Black U.S. citizen
Are a high-school senior, college student, or graduate student
Plan to pursue a degree with a focus on cybersecurity or information assurance
Have at least a 3.2 GPA on a 4.0 scale
Pursue your degree on campus or online on a part-time or full-time schedule 
Application Materials

To apply for the KnowBe4 Scholarship, you’ll need to submit an application that includes:

Your resume
Your academic transcript
1 letter of recommendation
Answers to 6 essay questions

If considered for the award, you may also need to do a 5-minute interview over Zoom with KnowBe4

#7 BLM² Scholarship Foundation College Scholarship

The BLM² Scholarship Foundation offers this scholarship for outstanding minority high school graduates from Illinois who plan to earn a baccalaureate degree from an accredited, four-year college or university with financial assistance.

Scholarship Award Amount

$1,000

Application Deadline

July 03, 2021 

Eligibility Requirements

You’re eligible for the BLM² Scholarship Foundation College Scholarship if you:

Are a minority (e.g. African American, Hispanic, Asian or Pacific American or Alaska Native)
Are a permanent Illinois resident
Are a graduating high school senior in the year of the award
Plan to attend an accredited college or university within the United States
Have at least a 3.0 cumulative GPA
Are enrolled as a full-time student during the fall academic semester of the award
Application Materials

To apply for the BLM² Scholarship Foundation College Scholarship, you’ll need to submit an application that includes:

A personal essay
An activity sheet 
1 recommendation letter
ACT or SAT scores
Your official high school transcript
A copy of your college/university acceptance letter
School information for sending out the scholarship check
Your college’s office of admissions contact information
5 Scholarship Tips for African American Students

College can be expensive. And winning scholarships will take some work. But if you follow these tips, you’ll be able to win some scholarship $$$ and cut down your costs for college! 

Apply for as many scholarships as you can 

We’ve listed here some amazing scholarships you can apply for as an African American high school student. But you qualify for so many other scholarships as well! There are scholarships for students who plan to pursue specific majors, like the arts or STEM. Scholarships for students of particular states. Scholarships for women. And so much more! 

Unfortunately, so many of these scholarships go unclaimed because not enough students know about them. So, don’t limit yourself. Use a scholarship search tool, find all of the scholarships you qualify for, apply to each of them, and win as much money for college as you can! 

Get really good at writing scholarship essays 

You may have noticed. All of the scholarships we’ve shared in this post require short essays as part of the application. Scholarship selection committees use these personal essays to get to know you better and find out what makes you special. 

So, you’ll want to make sure you know how to write scholarship essays that will help you win big. If you’re not sure how to get started, check out our guide for how to write a scholarship essay!

Prep your teachers and counselor on what to include in your letters of recommendation  

All of the scholarships we shared here also require you to get letters of recommendation. Some even require up to 3! The only problem: you have no idea what your teachers or counselor will write! 

But you can guide them to write about the things that make you special both in and outside of school. How? By preparing a document with your most important achievements, interests, goals, etc. This type of document is called a brag sheet. And the Common App offers a great brag sheet template you can easily download and use! 

Submit your FAFSA as early as possible  

If you haven’t submitted your FAFSA yet, get on that ASAP! And make sure to submit it as early as you can every year for as long as you’re in college. Why? Well, for one, you saw that one of the scholarships we listed here requires you to submit your FAFSA Student Aid Report as part of the application. 

But more importantly, according to the U.S. News and World Report, the best financial aid packages, which include scholarships and grants, go to the students that submit the FAFSA early. If you’ve never filled out the FAFSA before or need to refresh your memory, take a look at our guide on how to apply for FAFSA. 

Avoid scholarship scams 

Unfortunately, there are people out there who want to scam students looking for scholarships. You’ll know a scholarship is a scam if it asks you to pay an application fee, share personal information like your social security number, or respond to a spammy email for more information. Don’t fall for it! For more information check out our quick guide on scholarship scams and how to avoid them. 

(For more scholarship and college financial aid tips like these, check out our guide on how to win scholarships and The Secret to Paying $0 for College and Graduating Debt Free!)

Want to Find More Scholarship Money for College?

The African American scholarships we’ve shared in this post are just a small sample of all the scholarships you could win. There are so many more!

To easily find them, download Scholly Search, the #1 scholarship app in the world that instantly matches you with hundreds-of-thousands of dollars in scholarships based on your interests, accomplishments, and traits! 

You can also check out the rest of our blog where we share tips on how you can find ways to pay for college and win other scholarships like the National Merit Scholarship and Full-Ride Scholarships.

Good luck!

 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Recently, a growing number of states and local governments have began recognizing Indigenous Peoples’ Day instead of Columbus Day.

This holiday falls annually on the second Monday of October, and honors the culture and history of Native American and indigenous individuals nationwide.

At Scholly, we are proud to celebrate Indigenous Peoples’ Day and would love to share a sneak peek at two of the scholarships for Native American students in our scholarship database.

Click on the name of the scholarship opportunity for more information!

The Continental Society Daughters of Indian Wars Awards 

The Continental Society Daughters of Indian Wars has a strong mission that involves preserving the records and historic sites associated with Native ancestors and supporting the decedents of Native Americans, and awards two scholarships annually to enrolled tribe members.

Amount: $5,000 and $2,500

Due Date: June 15, 2020

Quick Facts:

To be eligible for these awards you must be an enrolled tribe member who plans to work with Native Americans in the fields of education or social service.
You must be accepted into or enrolled in an accredited university and hold at least a 3.0 GPA.
Paumanauke Native American Indian Scholarship

According to their website, “The Paumanauke Native American Indian Scholarship is funded through the Paumanauke Native American Festival, Inc., a non-profit organization, “to encourage and assist Native American Indians to complete their education.”

Amount: $500 (for up to six winners a year)

Due Date: Applications are accepted February 1-June 1 of 2020

Quick Facts:

To be eligible for this scholarship opportunity, you must be a tribally enrolled Native American Indian attending college full time.
In honor of the founder Nat Sales, one applicant will receive $ 750.00 as the “Nat Sales Memorial Award.”

Happy applying and good luck!

 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Happy 2019-2020 school year! 

Right now, you’ve either just started fall semester of high school or college, or about to very soon—which is exciting! (Oh and if you’re a college freshman who just started school, check out our incoming freshman’s ultimate guide to college!)

We at Scholly want you to have your best year yet, which means starting off on the right foot now. That’s right, many of the habits and patterns you put in place today will help set you up for success for the whole year. 

So let’s take a look at some of our favorite tips for starting off your academic year right.

1. Set Your Eyes on Supplies 

That’s the saying, right? Well, it might as well be, because when you have the resources you need for each of your classes—and have them from jump street—you’re much more likely to succeed academically.

Your teachers have put a lot of thought into the list of supplies or required materials for your classes, so please do yourself a favor and get them. Is your science teacher asking you to organize your lab reports in a binder with subject dividers? Does your English teacher require you to annotate your books with highlighters? Trust us, these materials and instructions are put in place to help you thrive!

Beyond what you’re required to get for classes, we encourage you to have fun in the supply aisle and get any supplies that will help you stay on top of things. Pencil bags, post-it notes, multi-colored pens, white out, mini staplers… the possibilities are endless! But seriously, you’ll be less stressed and have more energy to give to your academics (and social life) if you’re organized and have what you need to complete your work.

2. Use a Planner (Really!) 

We can’t stress this one enough. Whether you’re in high school or college, the fact is, you’re juggling a lot of academic work! Not to mention, extracurricular activities, social events with friends, family obligations, etc. 

Your homework assignments for school may be listed on your various class syllabi, but having all of your assignments written down in one place is key. You’ll have so much going on that even if you have a great memory, you’re bound to forget something if you don’t write it down! 

So get a planner and go through it, marking down big assignment due dates/deadlines (e.g. unit exams, major essays) and important events (e.g. football games, play rehearsals). Seeing everything visually laid out in front of you will help you stay on top of things that feel far off now (but will feel like they arrive “out of nowhere” quickly). Once you’ve written down the “big ticket” items, make it a habit to write a little to-do list for yourself every single day. These lists are for the immediate homework or activities you have to complete that day.

This helps you prioritize your work, so that you can “work smarter, not harder,” knocking out your highest priority tasks first…so that you’re not scrambling to finish work last minute or pulling all-nighters to get it done.

And listen, we like traditional assignment notebook style planners and calendars that you write in by hand, but smart phones these days are also super equipped with planning tools, including calendars that will sync to your desktop, interactive notepads, etc. So if it’s easier for you to keep track of your assignments on your phone, go for it.

3. Get Into a Routine 

Structure and a daily routine is really important for staying healthy, productive, and stress-free (and even the medical community agrees). Each person’s routine may vary though, so the key is to know yourself. 

For example, does your brain work better in the morning or at night? If it’s at night, it may behoove you to take a break after school to deprogram, eat, and re-energize before returning to homework after dinner (but don’t stay up too late!). Other students swear by calling it quits on homework by dinnertime and then getting up a little early, before school the next day, to finish homework. Either way is okay, so long as it works for you! 

Here are some other great tips for creating a routine for yourself:

Find Distraction-Free Spaces

Find a place (or places!) where you can study with minimal disruption and make it a point to study there regularly, ideally on the same days or at the same times. Is there a cafe you particularly like? A nook in the library? Make it a goal of yours to find a place where you genuinely like working and can do so easily.

Use Effective Time Management

Time management just may be THE #1 key to academic success. We’re huge fans of using pockets of down time to get ahead on homework and studying (15 minutes here, 10 minutes there) so that you have less work to take home. Small blocks of time add up, so squeeze in a little homework after you finish a test, before extracurricular activities, and so on.

You can also experiment with different time management techniques such as the Pomodoro Technique which involves working for 25 minute intervals with small breaks in between. There’s also a great technique called “eating the frog,” which involves tackling your hardest or highest priority task FIRST to get it out of the way. (And if you’ve made a daily list, as suggested above, this should be easy to do!)

“Chunk” Your Studying and Homework

Breaking your larger assignments or study sessions into smaller, more manageable chunks of time will help you stay out ahead of your work. Remember, it is ALWAYS best to be working ahead on work that’s due farther out than trying to play catch-up or finishing work last minute. If you have an exam on Friday, for example, it’s better to study a few minutes a day for the week leading up to it rather than cramming the night before. If you have an essay to write, build it one paragraph at a time instead of trying to crank the whole thing out at once. Your brain will thank you!

Use Your Weekends Wisely

If you’re productive with academic work on the weekends, your weekdays won’t feel quite as stressful. On the other hand, the weekends are also a good time to rest. And to see friends! A good rule of thumb is to try to divide your time into thirds split among school work, rest, and social time. Balance is key and if you can implement it early on, you’ll prevent a roller coaster-like schedule down the line.

Limit Screen Time 

We know, it’s hard. But this is a biggie. We’re not saying don’t ever spend time on your cellphone or binge your favorite shows, but most of us aren’t aware of just how much time time we’re spending on our trusty devices. Try setting reasonable limits and keeping to them. One way to do so is to set notifications on your social media apps to inform you when you’ve spent a certain amount of time on them.

Oh, and it REALLY helps to set aside your cellphone while you’re doing homework. You can take regular breaks to check it, but having it next to you will almost certainly slow you way down on your work!

4. Rest and Rejuvenate

In the bustle of school and social lives, it can be hard to remember to rest! But ample rest is critical for your physical, mental, and emotional health. Get enough sleep at night starting TODAY and your stress-management and productivity will be much, much higher.

5. Get the Support You Need

If you need additional academic support, speak up! MOST students need some additional help, whether it’s from their teachers, peers, or tutors. Ask questions in class and ask your teachers to meet with you after school or during their free periods if you need more face time. Visit your school’s tutoring or witting center. Ask a friend or peer you trust to help explain a concept or problem to you. The point is: don’t wait until it’s too late and you’ve fallen behind (or your grades have slipped) before seeking help!

And of course, the Scholly Platform is here to help! Use Scholly Editor to proof and improve all of your written work and use Scholly Math to get instant, step-by-step solutions to virtually any math problem so you know why the answer is right. These apps won’t just provide you immediate support; they’ll also help to make you an increasingly stronger student over time!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
With college tuition increasing every year, the demand for scholarships, financial aid, and student loans is higher than ever. However, what so many students don’t know is that schools with the highest tuition can often be the most affordable. Take Stanford for instance; the school is famous for having an amazing financial aid package, but with an acceptance rate lower than 5%, we can’t all go there. No fear! We found some schools, including Stanford, for whom pricy can mean affordable. Here are our top picks.

1. Princeton will fully fund all of the costs to attend (tuition, fees, room and board) for families with an annual income under $65,000. On average, Princeton reports awarding over $53,000 to members of their Class of 2022, leaving a cost of $13,600 for families. Each of the other Ivy League schools – Brown, Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, Penn, and Yale – offer similar aid packages based upon families’ demonstrated needs.

2. MIT also uses “need-blind” admissions, meaning they don’t consider your family income during their admissions process. This is important for college-bound students to understand; never shy from applying to a school because of tuition! Even though MIT costs over $70,000 per year, 72% of its students graduate debt-free, and families earning under $90,000 a year pay absolutely nothing.

3. Celebrating its 10th anniversary, Opportunity Vanderbilt is the university’s commitment to providing no-loan financial aid with no financial cutoffs or thresholds. Students with financial need are provided grants and scholarships to cover their cost of attendance through Vanderbilt’s extensive fundraising and donor support.

4. Franklin & Marshall is a small, historic college in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Called a model “that more colleges need to follow” by PBS’ TheNewsHour, F&M’s student recruitment strategy has diversified the student body across race and social class by awarding $56 million in financial aid each year. Some of that could help you!

5. Part of the Claremont Colleges Consortium, Pomona College serves around 1700 students just outside of Los Angeles. Like other need-blind schools, the vast majority of Pomona’s students receive grants and scholarships to attend. Student loans are not a part of Pomona’s aid package, but are an option to help cover immediate financial needs. The average cost of attending Pomona after aid is only $15,000.

6. University of Virginia provides need-based aid to eligible students and several merit-based opportunities for others seeking to apply. Merit awards are based on a student’s success or experiences – not on financial need or income level. Students are encouraged to apply for both need-based and merit awards, if applicable. At UVA and most other schools, completing the FAFSA (Free Application for Federal Student Aid) is the first step for determining need-based assistance.

7. Students at Bowdoin in Maine can “just focus on being a student.” Bowdoin provides grants up to the full cost of attendance, and also bundles student employment grants into their packages. When students work in research labs or offices on campus, they are able to build their resumes, manage their time, and learn how to be a team leader, all while earning additional money for school.

8. Last but certainly not least is Stanford. If any of the 1700 new students on campus each year have an annual family income of $125,000 or less, they get a free ride. Families earning $65,000 or less a year also have their room and board covered. For other students with not as much need, Stanford bundles federal and institutional awards to reduce debt, often making Stanford more affordable than colleges with lower tuition costs.

These schools are just some of the many that are working aggressively to make college less of a financial burden. Note that at many universities, financial aid programs apply only to U.S. citizens. Other schools have made strides to support undocumented students, and some have also extended their financial aid benefits to international students. However, be sure to read through everything closely when you do your research.

These schools are also difficult to get into – and the competition gets tougher every year. Your best shot being accepted to a highly selective, need-blind college is to stand out. Do well in high school, join organizations and leadership activities that you enjoy, and work hard.

If you’re looking for other ways to pay for your education, scholarships are your best bet. It’s free money and we’ve already found them for you on Scholly.

Find More Scholarship

Sources:

https://www.princeton.edu/admission-aid/affordable-all
https://sfs.mit.edu/undergraduate-students/
https://giving.vanderbilt.edu/oppvu/
https://www.fandm.edu/financial-aid/our-committment-to-need-based-aid
https://www.fandm.edu/financial-aid/financial-aid-resources
https://www.pomona.edu/financial-aid
http://sfs.virginia.edu/new/undergrad
http://sfs.virginia.edu/scholarships
https://www.bowdoin.edu/student-aid/pdf/general-financial-aid.pdf
https://www.bowdoin.edu/student-employment/index.html
https://www.stanford.edu/admission/

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
We know applying to scholarships can be daunting. There are so many to choose from and knowing how and when to start can be tricky. Strong applications require work, but the win is worth it. At Scholly, we are always looking to help our users win as many scholarships as possible. Here is our formula for success:

APPLY ASAP.

The early bird gets the worm with scholarships. If you’re looking for scholarships for any school year, start your search the summer before that school year. Fall is a popular time for scholarships looking to sponsor students, especially prospective college students. No matter your grade, you’ll want to get organized over the summer to be ready for applications opening from mid-August throughout the semester.

APPLY OFTEN.

Scholarships are available all year round and we add scholarships to our database daily. Make sure you’re checking Scholly regularly so you don’t miss free money opportunities. Our platform supports high school, college, and graduate students so you can use Scholly throughout your academic career. We also have in-app tools to help you organize your applications. Make an application timetable to help you knock out your applications consistently and on time.

KNOW YOUR AUDIENCE.

Scholarship panels are made up of people and people are subjective. Research the organization sponsoring the scholarship before applying. If it’s a non-profit, what’s their mission? If it’s a company, what’s their culture? Look into the organization’s work to see which values they champion. Can you highlight experiences or awards that speak to these values? Understanding judges will guide how you communicate with them and gives you an edge over applicants who haven’t done research.

FIT THE PART.

Now you know who you’re trying to win over, you can tailor your application to them. Speak to the characteristics the program is looking for in an application. If the essay topic is open-ended, choose one that tells your fullest story. An important thing to remember is that we are all humans who share similar wants and insecurities. Tell a relatable story. You want the person reading your application to think, “I feel that” or “I’ve been there before”. Run your essays through Scholly Editor to refine your writing.

TRUST THE PROCESS.

You won’t win every scholarship you apply to. While this is frustrating, it does not mean you should give up. A scholarship, i.e. free money, is always a better option than a loan. Even if you have a great financial aid package, scholarships can provide spending money. If you don’t win a scholarship, ask for feedback so you can keep improving your applications. For every scholarship you don’t win, there is another one out there waiting for you to claim it.

Eager to get started? Find and apply for scholarships now!

Apply Now
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Student life moves fast. You’re getting that degree, exploring your interests, joining new organizations, working part-time, volunteering, and crossing things off of your bucket list. But while you’re maintaining your busy schedule, you may be leaving money on the table – literally.

If you don’t take a moment to update your Scholly profile, there will be scholarship matches out there that won’t find you. For example, tutoring kids at a community center isn’t just a great way to make a difference, but can also get you more scholarship matches from programs looking to sponsor students involved in their communities. Just think: what has changed in my life recently? Maybe your GPA has improved, or you joined a new club, or even changed your major!

At Scholly we are constantly adding scholarships to our database to bring our users the best opportunities out there. We’ve added 160 scholarships in September and the month isn’t even over! Try to make monthly updates to your profile, especially if your activities are shifting. Keep adding your latest accolades, skills, and interests. No matter what happens in your life, personal or school related, programs want to know.

We’ve just hit fall and scholarship programs are hunting for their next generation of awardees. Do yourself a favor and go back and tick all the boxes that tell your fullest story. The result could be thousands of dollars saved on your education.

Update My Profile
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
“I’ll never forget that feeling of being on the stage and realizing I could go to my dream school.”

— Chika

Meet Chika Adiele, a determined college-bound Scholly user from Vegas, NV who won $142,000 in scholarships. Scholly was founded on the ideal of providing an opportunity for all. We stay motivated because of success stories like Chika’s. This is how she got that bread: 

Since I was little, I was always told to never worry about paying for college. Then one day during the summer before my senior year, my mom told me that I would have to pay tuition by myself because our financial situation. My dad, the financial breadwinner, had lost everything, and my single mom needed money for other expenses. I was shocked and devastated, but I’m not one to give up easily so I started exploring some options. That’s when I found my solution: scholarships.

In the beginning, the scholarship process was incredibly intimidating and overwhelming. Many websites were terribly organized and barely had any scholarships for me. Then I came across Scholly.

The website was super user-friendly, matched me with amazing scholarships, and even told me which scholarships best suited me with the Scholly score. I treated applying to scholarships like a part-time job. It was not easy. I went to a dual credit high school which practically made me a full-time college student. On top of my classes, I was the student council president, conducting undergraduate research, doing theater, and volunteering among other things. I’d apply during any spare time I had on the app: rehearsal, between classes, while I was eating, or even during my workouts. The Scholly deadline tracker to kept me on track with applications amidst my crazy schedule.

Over time, applying became easier. I started reusing the same essays and the Scholly blog tips had great advice. What used to take me 2 hours started taking 30-45 minutes. It actually started becoming fun and was a major confidence booster. With the help of Scholly, I applied to over 100 scholarships during my senior year. To top it off, I even got accepted into my dream school: The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

I still remember the very first major scholarship I won. It was the end of April, and it was from the Rogers Foundation. At this point, the college decision day was a little over a week away. I still didn’t have the funds to go to UNC-Chapel Hill, but I kept a positive attitude. Next thing I knew, I won the grand scholarship of $100,000. I’ll never forget that feeling of being on the stage and realizing I could go to my dream school. My mom was screaming and I teared I was so happy. It got even better. During the next ten days, I won over $40,000 more in outside scholarships. Not only was I able to afford college but could now go practically for free.

I plan on majoring in Biology and minoring in Spanish so that I can go to medical school and become a doctor. With the help of scholarships and Scholly, I’m one step closer to my dream.

Congratulations, Chika! The Scholly team is proud of you. 

Have your own Scholly Story to share? Let us know! Still need to make your dreams come true? Join Scholly today! 

Find More Scholarships
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Student success starts with affording college. Scholly has partnered with Forbes to provide free access to our platform for Harlem public and charter high school juniors and seniors! We are providing 2,500 lifetime access registrations for students to find free money to attend college.

Scholly for Harlem, held earlier this week, brought together community leaders, policymakers, educators, and change agents from around the city of New York. This marked the start of Scholly’s intentional efforts to strengthen the pipeline to and through college for students in Harlem.

Scholly’s core value is to make quality higher education affordable and accessible to everyone,” said Christopher Gray, Founder and CEO of Scholly. “We are delighted to collaborate with Forbes to create opportunities for young people in Harlem and give them the resources needed to achieve their educational goals.”

The event included a Q&A with Civil Rights activist DeRay McKesson and our very own brand ambassador, actor, and Civil Rights proponent Jesse Williams. Their conversation centered around equity and access, and how investments like Scholly can help students reimagine the possibilities for their future.  We also hosted a fireside chat with Elizabeth Strozier, the Executive Director of Programming for Forbes Live, and Gary Johnson, the Director of Strategy & Operations at the NYC Mayor’s Technology Office. Johnson, a Harlem native spoke to his commitment to equip students with educational tools that will change the trajectory of their lives. His excitement to team up with Scholly was evident. Scholly for Harlem highlighted the importance of democratizing access to education and the role technology can play in facilitating that access.

Why are we helping Harlem students?

Helping students continue their education and reach their fullest potential is exactly what Scholly is about. Home of the Harlem Renaissance, Harlem has been a major hub for African-American culture, business, and social change for the past century. As a business committed to diversity and inclusion, providing access to our platform that includes the scholarship search and Scholly Editor to Harlem students furthers our mission of providing opportunity for all.

Want to get involved?

Are you a Harlem student, teacher, or school administrator eager to get started and learn more about Scholly for Harlem? Or are you an organization or individual wanting to replicate the Scholly for Harlem model in another city? Contact Azani Pinkney at azani@myscholly.com for more information. Harlem students, happy scholarship searching and welcome to the Scholly family!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Recently, a story was released exposing the over $1 million theft in financial aid at Howard University. We were saddened by the news.

As a company committed to helping students pay for college and ensuring they can achieve their dreams, the financial aid scandal at Howard University hits home for us. In order to help Howard University students, we are launching a scholarship fund to award students who were adversely affected up to $10,000 in scholarships.

We look forward to contributing to ensure that these students’ futures remain bright and their financial burdens are eased. Students are the heart of our work, and we are committed  to provide opportunity for all.

Howard University Students Apply For An Award Here
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Here at Scholly, nothing motivates us more than making a difference in a student’s life. We are fortunate to be able to provide students with the resources they need for higher education every day and love hearing about your stories!

Recently, Priya Pillay of Folsom, California wrote to us, and we wanted to learn more about her — her goals, and her journey with Scholly.

“Thank you so much allowing students like me to discover extra money for school. From the bottom of my heart thank you.”— Priya

As part of our goal to keep students at the core of our work, Priya is this week’s Scholly Guest Blogger, sharing a bit about her background and her educational goals to inspire more students like her to chase their dreams, pursue higher education, and become a part of the Scholly Family. Read below for Priya’s story and click here to learn more about Scholly.

My name is Priyadevi Pillay. I am a computer science major at Folsom Lake College in sunny Northern California. I am so grateful for the Scholly app and its impact on my life thus far. I was matched with scholarships based on characteristics unique to my life, and the results I garnered were more than I ever anticipated. One of the scholarships I was matched with was the “Community College Scholarship.” I applied and was floored to receive an email from the donor stating that I won! To see this achievement while looking back at the day I registered for Scholly, simply expecting to see what the app offered is absolutely incredible.  

I am a caregiver for both my parents, due to chronic illness, and do not have supplemental income from a job outside of school. Because of the Scholly app, I am now able to spend more time towards my goal of transferring to Sacramento State University and specializing in Engineering Cybersecurity Software because I am not worried about how to pay for college. As a precedent to my academic goals, I have held classes in my city for seniors that help them identify scammers and what to do if they have already fallen victim, and providing such skills to those who may not know about technology has been very rewarding and I hope that with the help of Scholly, I am able to continue to help such individuals. I am honored to have the opportunity to serve my community while doing something I love.

I thank you from the bottom of my heart for making your app so easy to use and providing a credible database to find extra money for school. I truly appreciate that now I have reduced my financial burden and I can take care of my family as well as work towards my academic goals.  Life seems to fall into place when you find what you are genuinely passionate about, and I am humbled by receiving money to follow it and excited for what the future holds for me.

Thanks, Scholly!

Want To Be A Part Of The #Schollyfam? Sign Up Here!
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Scholly has helped students all over the country win over $70,000,000 in scholarships.

At its core, Scholly is a platform for students, and what better way to show what we’re about than by featuring their stories? We want to hear about how Scholly has impacted your scholarship search and overall educational journey. Whether you are in high school, college, or a recent graduate, your story deserves its spotlight.

We’ve awarded thousands of individuals scholarships so far, and the list keeps growing! Scholly is truly the gift that keeps on giving. Sharing your #SchollyStory takes courage; if you’re not sure where to start, see below for testimonials from four of our previous scholarships recipients to give you the extra motivation you need! You can also view some of our most notable recipients here.

Share My Scholly Story!

Sunny
“There are thousands of dollars of scholarships out there with your name on it, but the hard part is finding those scholarships. Scholly did exactly that for me, it helped me find the scholarships that wanted to invest in a student like me. I would never have thought one download on the App Store would have such an impact on my future. I am grateful for Scholly in helping me realize my potential and showing me that the sky is truly the limit. Without the platform, attending a top-notch university like Princeton on a full-ride would not have an attainable task for me.”

Hajira
“Becoming a Regeneron Science Talent Search Scholar gave my research and scientific ability national recognition, and made all the hours of work I’ve poured into my research totally worth it. Including such a prestigious honor on all future applications and resumes will no doubt be a huge help in the future. I anticipate that this award will open new doors for me in terms of internships at labs and other competitions I decide to take my research to as well. The application for this was a pain, but the recognition that comes with this award is invaluable, and it’s something I’ll carry with me for life.

Bobby
“I’m a freshman studying pre-nursing at the University of Utah. I love rock climbing, backpacking, rafting and getting as much excitement out of life as possible and in my free time I’m a jazz singer. I am a big believer of higher education but currently it is so expensive which makes it seemingly impossible to receive a degree. Getting this scholarship, by using Scholly, helped me so much with relieving the financial burden and making me one step closer to becoming a nurse.”

Anais
“I’m a freshman studying pre-nursing at the University of Utah. I love rock climbing, backpacking, rafting and getting as much excitement out of life as possible and in my free time I’m a jazz singer. I am a big believer of higher education but currently it is so expensive which makes it seemingly impossible to receive a degree. Getting this scholarship, by using Scholly, helped me so much with relieving the financial burden and making me one step closer to becoming a nurse.”

Sunny, Hajira, Bobby, and Anais are just four exceptional examples of the students who have achieved their dreams through Scholly, and it is our privilege to share their stories with you; and now, it’s your turn.

Share Your Scholly Story Here
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
March has arrived at the blink of an eye, and you know what that means! College application season is right around the corner, and financial planning is in full swing for current and incoming college students. These things can often be overwhelming with classes and exams to worry about, but Scholly eases the process for you, and helps you get ready for your academic journey in the easiest, most affordable way possible. Not only do we offer access to scholarships so you can go to college debt free, we provide a multitude of educational resources to ease your journey to higher education. You can download the app, or create an account here to get started. You’ll gain instant access to thousands of scholarships as well as tips & advice on how to navigate this exciting time in your life.

As a student about to enter college, you might be feeling lost in a sea of scholarships, wondering which you should apply for. Fortunately, Scholly matches you with the opportunities best suited for you based on the information you provide us with. Our database has recurring scholarships, one-time scholarships, and even awards specifically for the different tools you will need to assist in your education (e.g. textbooks), providing something for everyone, and ensuring we stay true to our motto:

Opportunity for All.

To give you a glimpse of what you’ll be able to access in the app (and to get some upcoming scholarship deadlines on your radar!), we put together a list of 10 scholarships that are currently featured on the Scholly app. Submission dates are approaching quickly, so be sure to apply soon. Who knows? You might end up being featured on our Success Stories page and become a part of our #SchollySquad. 

Start Your Search

1. Anthony A. Martino Memorial Scholarship

Deadline: 3-12-2018

Award: $10,000

2. Community College STEM Scholarship Program

Deadline: 3-12-2018

Award: $2,000

3. STEM Bridge Scholarship Program

Deadline: 3-12-2018

Award: $1,000

4. AL High School Seniors Scholarship

Deadline: 3-13-2018

Award: $6,000

5. Fontana Transport Inc. Scholarship Program

Deadline: 3-14-2018

Award: $5,000

6. California Eastern Star Foundation Scholarship

Deadline: 3-15-2018

Award: $5,000

7. Byron F. “Corky” Knoll Memorial Scholarship Fund

Deadline: 3-15-2018

Award: $1,900

8. Carrol A. and L. May Weimer Memorial Scholarship Fund

Deadline: 3-15-2018

Award: $1,500

9. Elizabeth Horvath Swimming Scholarship Fund

Deadline: 3-15-2018

Award: $2,000

10. Susan Ekdale Memorial Field Camp Scholarship

Deadline: 3-15-2018

Award: $3,000

Keep up with Scholly on social!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Our first-ever Scholly Summit, held in Chicago, Illinois on February 10, 2018, ended with a BANG. We had to opportunity to meet hundreds of Chicago Public School students, listen to words of wisdom from Chance The Rapper, Jesse Williams, and our very own Christopher Gray, and best of all, award one CPS Senior a scholarship!

Meet Alexiea Feaster, winner of our $10,000 Scholly Summit Scholarship. Alexiea dreams to become a doctor and we are so proud to be able to contribute to her educational success!

As part of her journey, Alexiea is this week’s Scholly Guest Blogger, sharing a bit about her background and her educational goals to inspire more students like her to chase their dreams, pursue higher education, and become a part of the Scholly Family.

Hi everyone!

My name is Alexiea Feaster I am so honored to have received this scholarship! Currently, I am a senior at William J. Bogan High School in Chicago, Illinois with dreams of attending Xavier University of Louisiana in pursuit of becoming a Doctor…for free; and Scholly has brought me one step closer to this goal. I hope to one day save lives for those who are hurting and helpless, and Xavier’s pre-med program will best help me in achieving this dream.

The Scholly app has been a tremendous help in matching me to scholarships that are the best fit for me and my goals, and the best part is that it saves time and eliminates the confusion students often feel while using online scholarship searches. On top of using the app, I had the opportunity to attend the Scholly Summit and it was an incredibly eye-opening experience that I feel fortunate to have attended. Of all the speakers we listened to, Derrius Quarles resonated with me the most. He is from Chicago, and is known as the “Million-Dollar Scholar.” He said something that I will never forget: “What you need to know now is that it’s bigger than you.”, meaning that life will bring us trauma, failure, and obstacles, but all of that is part of a much bigger picture of our success. We cannot get caught up in these micro-moments and let negativity bring us down. Most importantly, we need to accept help earlier on in order to make the journey to success an easier one and pass that knowledge on to others. When he said this, I felt inspired, motivated, and understood my purpose.

I know that to achieve greatness I will have to think about the lives of others because how can an economy flourish if no one can pass knowledge on to the next person? Thank you, Scholly for granting me this scholarship and opportunity. You have opened the doors to success for me and I hope I can continue to make you proud!

Congratulations Alexia! We can’t wait to see all that you achieve.

Want to win $10,000 like Alexia? Apply to our ‘No Essay’ $10k Summer Scholarship!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
We at Scholly are thrilled to announce our partnership with Graduate Hotels to provide $150,000 in scholarships and student debt relief to current college students and alumni.

Takes less than 2 minutes to apply!

APPLY NOW

We’re joining forces to offer 3 lucky students or graduates $50,000 to pay for college tuition or existing student loan debt.

The national student loan debt is currently over $1.56 trillion between 45 million borrowers, and it’s our goal to both ease this burden and build momentum behind a movement that makes college more affordable to all.   

The application is NOW LIVE (and the deadline to enter is 11:59pm PST on October 31, 2019), so don’t miss out! Winners will be announced in December 2019 and scholarships will be awarded in early 2020. 

ENTER TO WIN TODAY
Want more scholarship opportunities? Scholly has helped students win $100 Million in scholarships so far…

Scholly Search is the boldest, baddest scholarship-matching app out there and it just got a major upgrade*!

With a brand new look and feel, Scholly Search is now easier to use than ever and is optimized to provide you the most hyper-personalized scholarship matches ever. And you know what that means… more free money for college!

START SEARCHING

*Available on iOS. Coming soon to Android and Web.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
You recently graduated college and now you’re out there hustling for your dream job. Or maybe you’ve landed a pretty great job already, but you want to be prepared for what’s next career-wise. 

Searching for jobs can be stressful, especially for recent college grads, who often have less interview and work experience than some of the competition. 

But don’t fret! There are actually many reasons why companies like hiring recent college graduates, and if you play your cards right, you’ll find a job you love in your chosen field soon enough! 

We’ve assembled some of our best advice for job hunting right out of college—take a look!

1. Network

So many jobs are staffed based upon connections. In fact, many people land jobs that haven’t even been officially posted yet. How? Networking. You can find networking events on social media, through alumni emails from your Alma mater, through friends, or on various networking sites. These events provide a great opportunity to meet and make a positive impression on potential employers, putting a face with your name. Also, it’s a good idea to take business cards with you to hand out, and to sign up for any email lists circulating at these events so you can stay updated about job opportunities as they arise. 

2. Change Your Social Media Game

Potential employers will look you up on social media. We repeat: employers will look you up on social media! So first of all, make sure anything you post publicly is “employer friendly.” This content is somewhat subjective, obviously, but use your best judgement. If you’re even somewhat worried that you may offend or alienate a potential employer you’d love to work for, don’t post it. Hopefully college was a blast, but if you’re on a serious job hunt, it’s time to shift your social media away from party photos and towards meaningful content that could help get you hired.

More importantly: use your social media to network! We all think of LinkedIn as the go-to social media platform for finding a job (and it’s great), but don’t underestimate the power of Facebook for job hunting either. You can join all kinds of industry-specific or college alumni groups to find out about opportunities, or even share public posts about the type of job you’re looking for. You may be really surprised at who bites. 

3. Do Your Homework 

Every now and then, a perfect job will just fall into your lap, but most of the time, you’ll have to go out and find it. Conduct Google and LinkedIn searches for the job titles and companies that most appeal to you. And then spend some time doing actual research on your ideal companies. Read their websites thoroughly, check out their CEOs’ and employees’ profiles on LinkedIn, etc. Be super clear on the mission and ethos of a company, and know precisely what you could contribute to their work environment. And then follow them on social media so you know when they’re hiring! 

4. Be Proactive in Your Communication

Searching for current job openings is a great way to find a job, but don’t be afraid to reach out to prospective employers even when they aren’t hiring. Sending an email to the HR director (or general contact email) expressing your interest in working for the company indicates that you are a driven, proactive individual and has the power to make a great impression—so that when they are hiring, you spring to mind! Be succinct, professional, and direct in your email, providing specific reasons why you’d make a great addition to their team.  You can also attach your resume, so make sure that it’s polished and updated.

5. Get Creative With Your Experience 

The #1 challenge recent grads face when job searching is lack of experience. It seems like a catch-22: how do you ever get more experience if you don’t have any to show?! Keep in mind that having “experience” doesn’t necessarily mean that you’ve done the job advertised before. You can include internships, job shadowing/observations, volunteer work, temporary work, etc. on your resume if you feel that the skills demonstrated could be valuable to the position you’re currently applying for. Along those lines, be open to applying for jobs that might not be a perfect scenario or fit, but that will get you the necessary experience to serve as a stepping stone to your next job. These include part-time jobs, temporary contract work,  jobs with odd hours, etc. When in doubt, you can always sign up for a temp agency, as many people get hired to full-time from temp jobs. 

6. Put a Positive Spin on Your “Freshness”

You’re fresh out of college and maybe you’re worried that you’re unqualified for any of the jobs you want. Well, there’s another way to look at your greenness in the career world! You’re a blank slate in some ways, and that’s exciting to employers. In your cover letters and interviews, stress that you’re willing to adapt to and grow within a company’s particular culture and protocol. And because you’ve just left college, you’re a wellspring of contemporary knowledge within your filed. You’re up to date on the latest technologies and advancements in your field, and ready to put your education to use!

Here’s How Scholly Can Help Recent Graduates!

Use Scholly Editor to instantly edit and improve all of your job application materials, from cover letters to personal statements!

And, if you’ve got student loans, be on the lookout for our ever-expanding, exclusive opportunities to help you get out debt.

Best of luck, and happy job hunting!

 

 

 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
We get it—you’re a current student and you’re busy. 

That’s why we’ve assembled a list of 10 of our favorite scholarships that are super easy to apply for! 

And the best part is, they’re all available to current college students!

Some of the deadlines are fast approaching, so make sure to apply ASAP! Scholarships are listed in order of most recent deadlines, and you can click on each name for more details.

For tons more scholarships tailored just for you…

Try Scholly Search
1) Green Your Getaway Scholarship 

Amount: $5,000

Due Date: July 31, 2019

Highlights:

DoSomething.Org helps mobilize students to create social change. According to their website, you can “Sign up for a volunteer, social change, or civic action campaign to make real-world impact on a cause you care about.” 
Share their sustainable travel guide online or send a postcard (you can make your own or use theirs) with the keyword “sustainable travel” and you’ll be entered to win.
2) The Give Back Scholarship 

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: July 31, 2019

Highlights:

According to their website, “The CE Shop is an industry leader in Pre-Licensing, Post-Licensing and Continuing Education for real estate. As an organization, we take great pride in our core values; especially our sixth value – We Give Back.”
This scholarship requires a very short essay about what “giving back” means to you.
3) The MoolahSPOT Scholarship

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: July 31, 2019

Highlights: 

MoolahSPOT is a scholarship search database and advice hub for helping fund college.
This application requires a short essay (400 words or less) with several prompt options.
4) Share Your Talent Scholarship

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: August 1, 2019

Highlights:

Greenlight Booking is a premier entertainment and event planning company that wants to help support students’ unique talents.
For this application, you’ll record a very short (under 3 minutes) video sharing your talent and briefly discussing “your journey honing your talent and how others have encouraged you.”
5) Make Me Laugh Scholarship

Amount: $1,500

Due Date: August 21, 2019

Highlights:

Unigo helps students find the perfect college for them, as well as scholarship funding.
This is a fun application that requires you to provide a very brief but funny personal anecdote (instead of an essay)!
6) $10,000 ScholarshipPoints Scholarship

Amount: $10,000

Due Date: The drawing will be September 15, 2019

Highlights:

ScholarshipPoints is a program with a mission to make scholarship applications super quick and simple for students.
All you have to do is fill out a quick form with your name and contact info!
7) Don’t Text and Drive Scholarship

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: September 30, 2019

Highlights:

Digital Responsibility believes “that it’s our responsibility to use technology in a way that doesn’t harm others and to be aware of the impact that technology has on our health, environment, and society at large.”
This scholarship application includes a very brief response (140 characters) about texting while driving.
10 finalists will be selected to move on to a final round. 
8) Shout it Out Scholarship

Amount: $1,500

Due Date: September 30, 2019

Highlights:

Unigo helps students find the perfect college for them, as well as find scholarship funding.
There’s no formal essay for this scholarship, just a brief response (250 words of less) to the following prompt: “If you could say one thing to the entire world at once, what would it be and why?”
9) Modern Castle Scholarship 

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: October 1, 2019

Highlights:

Modern Castle is a cool company that researches, tests, and reviews all kinds of home products, providing honest valuable feedback.
For this scholarship, you’ll have to submit a brief (5 minutes or less) video answering some questions about yourself.
10) Give Me Liberty Easy Scholarship

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: January 31, 2020

Highlights:

The College Monk helps students find the best online colleges and universities.
There are no GPA requirement AND no essay requirements for this scholarship!
These are Just a Handful of The Always-Expanding Scholarships Available to Our Members 

Scholly has already helped students will over $100 million in scholarships, and we want to help you too! If you want to find more incredible scholarships personally tailored just for you, use Scholly Search and get instantly matched with customized opportunities!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Many people don’t realize this, but you can apply for scholarships while you’re enrolled as a current college student!  

Yes, you can keep finding more free money for school over the course of your academic career.

And trust us, the money is out there, you just have to know where to find it. That’s why Scholly’s here to help. For more scholarships tailored just for you…

Try Scholly Search

So without future ado, here are 10 of our favorite scholarship opportunities available to current college students! 

For more information and direct access to applications, just click on the name of each scholarship. And remember, you can apply to as many of them as you’d like!

(Oh, and Scholly Editor is a great resource for editing your scholarship essays.)

1. Solveable.com Debt-Free Scholarship

Amount: $2,500

Due Date: July 31, 2019

Quick Facts:

Solveable.com is a company dedicated to providing a wide range of debt prevention resources. They believe that “one of the keys to the debt-free movement is to avoid debt in the first place, which can result from positive financial lifestyles and habits.”
This application requires a 500-1,000 word essay about personal financial freedom.
2. Life Coach Spotter Scholarship 

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: August 1, 2019

Highlights:

Life Coach Spotter helps students and other individuals find the right life coach for them, based on their particular aspirations and goals. 
There is no minimum GPA for this scholarship
A 1,000-1,500 word essay on the biggest challenge you’ve overcome is required.
3. Major Insurance Scholarship 

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: August 15, 2019

Highlights:

Major Insurance has a mission to save people significant money on auto insurance, and this scholarship was created “to support and encourage safety on the road.”
A very brief essay about safe driving is required for this application.
4. MarvelOptics.com Essay Writing Scholarship 

Amount: $1,500

Due Date: August 15, 2019 for the Fall semester and January 5, 2020 for the Spring semester.

Highlights: 

According to their website, “The founders of MarvelOptics.com are young entrepreneurs who know the value of quality education. They appreciate hard work and ambition and believe that money should never become an obstacle when working towards one’s dreams.” 
The application involves responding to a brief thematic prompt through a short essay or video.
5. Global Teletherapy Scholarship  

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: October 3, 2019

Highlights:

Global Teletherapy offers speech therapy, occupational therapy, and mental health counseling—and they believe that “families deserve an opportunity to provide their children with high-quality education without sinking into debt [while] students deserve to spend their years in college unburdened by the worry of paying off loans after graduation.”
This merit-based scholarship requires a GPA of 3.0 or above and a 2,000-word application essay in response to a prompt about personal growth.
6. Dreambox Media Online Marketing Scholarship 

Amount: $1,000 (3 scholarships available)

Due Date: October 27, 2019

Highlights:

Dreambox Media is a social media and marketing company that wants to help support students who have a passion for social media.
A 500-1,000 word essay on social media marketing strategies is required for this scholarship.
7. Bella Ballroom Performing Arts Scholarship 

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: November 15, 2019

Highlights:

Bella Ballroom, a dance studio in Orange County, CA, has a mission is to “provide opportunities to young, emerging artists.”
One of the requirements for this scholarship is that you must be a current undergraduate majoring in dance, theater, music, performing arts or another related field.
This scholarship application requires a very short essay about your experiences in the performing arts.
8. Depression Treatment Education Scholarship 

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: December 15, 2019

Highlights:

This opportunity is offered by Paradigm Malibu, an adolescent treatment center specializing in the treatment of mental health issues faced by young adults.
A 1,000 word essay about your academic goals is required.
9. Vaccine Lawyer Higher Education Scholarship 

Amount: $2,000

Due Date: December 13, 2019

Highlights:

According to their website, “A commitment to education and supporting the community is a core value at My Vaccine Lawyer. In addition to our pro bono and philanthropic efforts, our firm values education and understands that obtaining an education is the pathway to success for many students.”
There is a 1,000 word essay required for this application. 
10. Review It Scholarship

Amount: $1,000

Due Date: April 30, 2020

Highlights:

Review It is sponsored by Dr. Gabriel and Christine Chui, two global philanthropists dedicated to a wide-range of causes, including making higher education affordable.
This scholarship application requires a brief but thoughtful movie review.

These are Just a Handful of The Always-Expanding Scholarships Available to Our Members 

Scholly has already helped students will over $100 million in scholarships, and we want to help you too! If you want to find more incredible scholarships personally tailored just for you, use Scholly Search and get instantly matched with customized opportunities!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’re heading to college this fall, either as a new or returning student, chances are you’ll need some extra dough on hand. 

And really, wherever you are in life, getting ahead financially is always a good idea. 

Getting a summer job is a common option, and many businesses hire seasonal employees. But we also love these other money saving tips for fattening your wallet stat.

Sell Your Stuff

Especially if you’re moving into a dorm, now’s a great time to prioritize the possessions that mean most to you—as well as those you’re ready to let go of. (Plus, we’ve heard amazing things about the KonMari method of simplifying your life…)

There are all kinds of ways to sell your stuff, and you might be really surprised at how eager people are to buy it.

Try a good, old-fashioned yard sale or garage sale if you have the space (and want to make selling your stuff a collaborative effort with friends). Or, sell your stuff online on one or more of the MANY marketplaces out there (like Letgo, eBay, Etsy, Vinted, Tradesy, Craigslist, NextDoor…).

Use a Change Jar

It may sound old school, but don’t underestimate the power of a change jar (or piggy bank)! If you’re diligent about tossing your spare change into it every day, you’ll be thrilled at how quickly your small contributions add up. At the end of the summer, you can cash it out for something you need or want.

Get Gigs

If you need the spending cash but don’t want the commitment of a regular summer job, there are hundreds and hundreds of “gigs” available out there. And what is gig work, exactly? Temporary, flexible work that usually pretty specialized. For example, mowing lawns, driving for a ride share company (like Uber or Lyft), walking dogs, and baby-sitting could all be considered gig jobs. 

One of the best ways to find a gig is to ask around in your neighborhood. You can also use sites like NextDoor, Takl, and Thumbtack to advertise your unique services and see who bites. 

Find Free Things to do For Fun

Going to the movies, out to eat, and to concerts is an amazing way to spend the summer, but it can be super draining on your bank account. 

You can save a lot of money by opting for activities that are free or low-cost. For example, visit local museums on their free days, and keep your eyes open for free outdoor street/park festivals (which are very common come summer). Spending time in the great outdoors is usually free too. Instead of meeting with your friends out and about, consider rotating hangouts at each others’ houses.

Make Your Own Coffee

A cup of coffee, when purchased at a restaurant or cafe, can easily cost $3. And more elaborate drinks like lattes and frappuccinos can cost way more than that. If you’re a regular coffee drinker or enjoy meeting friends for coffee dates, this can add up quickly! 

Making your own coffee at home is much more cost effective, so consider taking coffee from home to go, instead of shelling out regularly for a fancy cup of joe.

And Of Course, Search for Scholarship Money!

This is perhaps our favorite money saving tip…because it can save you tons. And summer is actually the perfect time to look for scholarships! If you’re a current student or are considering returning to school, use Scholly Search to find all kinds of personalized scholarships to help you pay for college. We also offer student loan payoff programs for college students and graduates, so keep a lookout for all of our amazing opportunities as they’re announced!

Happy saving!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Happy PRIDE from all of us here at Scholly!

Our credo is “opportunity for all,” and we’re proud to extend our warmest support, allyship, and advocacy to the LGBTQ+ community—this month and always.

With PRIDE month in full swing (and a week left to celebrate), we thought we’d share two of our favorite LGBTQ+ scholarship opportunities.

Click on the name of the scholarship for more information and directions for exactly how to apply.

Easy Scholarship: Support the LGBTQ+ Community

Amount: $2,000

Due Date: June 30, 2019 (Hurry, you still have time!)

Quick Facts: This scholarship is awarded by DoSomething.org, which is assembling an amazing, crowdsourced guide full of LGBTQ+ and allyship tips and resources that they plan to send to students around the country.

Submit your tip for the guide and you’ll immediately be entered to win a $2,000 scholarship!

According to DoSomething.Org, “roughly one-third of LGBTQ+ students have skipped school over safety concerns related to bullying or harassment,” so please help by submitting your tip. You can make a huge impact this way, even if you don’t win this time around!

LGBTQ Scholarship For Senior High School Students

Amount: $500

Due Date: August 1, 2019

Quick Facts: The LGBTQ Support and Social Group USA awards a yearly college scholarship to a rising college freshman in the LGBTQ+ community, supported by fundraising efforts throughout the year.

You must have documented volunteer work at an LGBTQ+ support group or organization, and will need to complete a short essay to be eligible.

Sharing is Caring!

We highly encourage you to submit to and share these opportunities. If you’re not a member of the LGBTQ+ community, please pass them along to someone who could use the extra support!

Want to find more amazing scholarships personally tailored just for you? Use Scholly Search and get matched to tons of customized scholarships opportunities!

 

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
These Lucky Winners Are Taking a YEAR-LONG Vacation From Their Student Loans!
Meet The Winners of The Sun is Also a Star Student Loan Payoff Program

The Sun is Also a Star and Scholly recently decided to pay off a YEAR’S WORTH of student loan payments for 10 lucky students or graduates!

After reviewing thousands of applications, we’re thrilled to introduce the winners to you.

ANTHONY S.

Human Resources
Studied Government

What will you do with the money saved during a year-long vacation from your student loan payments?

I will pay off all my medical and credit card debt! Then begin substantially saving more money.

How do you think this opportunity could change your life? Or why is it important to you?

This opportunity will allow me to focus on my long-term plans and will eliminate all the stress I had regarding money for at least a year.

JESSICA C.

PhD Candidate

“Since I began my higher education, sleep has not always been my top priority. Whether it was going to class until 9:30pm and waking up at 7:00am to go to work, or staying up to finish an assignment on time, sleep has taken a back seat. However, the number one reason I stay up late is because I worry. Mainly, I worry about money. At 26, I’ve had nine years of higher education, all of which I have taken out loans for. Unfortunately, I have two more years until graduation, which means two more years of loans. I have worked during all of my degrees, most of which has been full time employment… So, you ask what I will do with a year of financial freedom? I’ll get more sleep.”

SOCORRO G. 

Office Manager
MBA candidate

What will you do with the money saved during a year-long vacation from your student loan payments?

I would love to plan a trip to Europe since I’ve never been.

How do you think this opportunity could change your life? Or why is it important to you?

It will help eliminate the burden of student loans as well as reconfirm that I made the right decision going to grad school even though it is a big financial investment.

CALVIN C.

Director of Music and Dance
Studied Music Education

What will you do with the money saved during a year-long vacation from your student loan payments?

I plan on saving the money for a home for my family.

How do you think this opportunity could change your life? Or why is it important to you?

Being able to get ahead on my student loans will enable me to create a wonderful future for my family and focus on my students.

DANAE G.

“With my newfound financial freedom, I could save towards a down payment for a home. A home that my family can always come to as the home base.  A home I would value and relish with strong pride of ownership.  A home that would be spacious enough to host my family during the holidays to honor our traditions while creating new ones. A home that would allow me to build equity and advance my financial knowledge and goals. A home that would hopefully be a lasting treasure to my family and me.”

IRODA A.

Digital Marketing Project Manager
Studied Business Administration: Arts Management

What will you do with the money saved during a year-long vacation from your student loan payments?

I will use that money to buy a piano keyboard, pay for my music lessons, and buy studio time to record my original songs.

How do you think this opportunity could change your life? Or why is it important to you?

This opportunity will allow me to pay off my student debt more quickly, as I will continue making the required monthly payments in addition to Scholly’s but I will no longer allocate the rest of my income to paying off my loans. I will now spend that money on things that really matter to my artistic growth including music equipment, music lessons, and studio time to record my music.

SARAH Y.

Therapeutic Social Worker
Studied Social Work

“It was not an easy decision to take out thousands upon thousands of dollars to pursue a Master’s degree. However, I knew it was needed and made the choice to go after it. My graduate school education and training has brought me to where I am now – a social worker in therapeutic foster care. This work is incredibly meaningful and it does pose its own set of challenges and stressors. One unchanging constant is that I am humbled by the resilience, love and care demonstrated by the children and families I serve.”

DONALD G.

People Leader & Leadership Coach, Non-Profit Manager
Studied Technological Entrepreneurship & Management

What will you do with the money saved during a year-long vacation from your student loan payments?

I plan on starting a savings account for my children to help them get started with college when they graduate.

How do you think this opportunity could change your life? Or why is it important to you?

Sometimes all you need is just a little boost to help you get to where you want to be in life. Helping my children to start their own path and make their own way having that same opportunity is life changing in itself.

SAMIA SAID

Social Worker
Studied Psychology and Social Work

 What will you do with the money saved during a year-long vacation from your student loan payments?

Pay down credit cards and save.

How do you think this opportunity could change your life or why is this opportunity important to you?

Current cost of living in my area is expensive which makes it impossible to save for an emergency. This opportunity allows me to save and pay down other debts.

MATTHEW S.

Social Worker & Psychotherapist

Next Time it Could Be You!

College is expensive and paying for it can be super stressful, so let Scholly help! Learn more about all of our exciting opportunities to help you pay for college, and use Scholly Search to find scholarships personally tailored just to you. Happy searching!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
If you’re a senior in high school, you probably just had your very last day of class (or are about to). Next up: graduation!

Graduating high school is an enormous accomplishment and you should be very proud of yourself. As you prepare for this next chapter, which may include heading to college, we’d love to share with you some of our favorite pieces of advice for graduates so that you can make the most of this exciting transition period.

Advice for Graduates #1: Get Your Ducks in a Row

Let’s talk logistics. Have you cleaned out your locker? Made sure you have enough tickets for your family for your graduation ceremony? Returned any school property that was issued to you (think: calculators or Chromebooks)? Remember that you can get fined for unreturned items… even after you’re long gone.

Academically speaking, make sure to touch base with each of your teachers if you’re unclear at all where you stand when it comes to your grades. You don’t want any surprises when your final report card comes in the mail. This is especially important if you’re going to college because your new school will expect you to graduate with the same grades (or better) than you submitted when you applied.

This may be the last thing on your mind (summer is here after all!), but if you anticipate asking for a character reference or letter of recommendation from a teacher or mentor at your high school, now is actually a great time to do so. Ask your teacher if they’d be willing to write you a letter of recommendation at some point over the summer and that way you’ll have it on hand if a job, academic program, scholarship, etc. asks for one in the future.

Advice for Graduates #2: Part Ways With Grace

Are there are any teachers or administrators who were particularly special to you during the tenure of your high school career? Consider writing them a nice card or giving them a little gift to express your gratitude for their support over the last few years. Believe it or not, most teachers value their relationships with you greatly, and it means the world to them to hear that you had a positive experience in their classes.

Also, try to say proper goodbyes to your acquaintances. You’ll more than likely stay in touch with your good friends, but don’t underestimate how much you can miss someone that you didn’t realize was actually a huge part of your life—even if you weren’t that close. So make sure to say goodbye and best of luck to your teammates, classmates, or peers in mutual clubs or activities that you’ve shared time with.

To that point, get contact information for anyone you want to keep in touch with! In today’s social media driven world, it’s usually easy to keep in touch. But life moves and changes quickly, and it can be harder to track someone down than you think. Phone numbers and emails are the best way to ensure that you can get a hold of someone down the line, so don’t be afraid to ask—or to give your info to anyone you hope to stay in touch with.

Finally, was there anyone you weren’t on such good terms with? Consider making amends and parting ways on a high note. You certainly don’t have to do this, but if you’re comfortable, bury the hatchet if possible.

Advice for Graduates #3: Budget Your Time (But Also… Relax!)

The summer is relatively short and 10-12 weeks will actually fly by, so make sure to keep your eye on your calendar and budget your time wisely.

If you’re going away to college, there are probably a lot of people you’ll want to see before heading off, so prioritize plans with the friends and family you’ll miss the most.

That said, you’ve just essentially finished a four-year marathon (and may be onto the next one!) so make sure to get enough down time and fun in your summer too. If you’re working and/or taking summer school, remember that it’s as important to schedule relaxation as it is to schedule work!

Advice for Graduates #4: Try Something New This Summer

Whatever your future plans, you’re standing on an amazing threshold between life chapters. Now is a great time to try something out of your comfort zone because, let’s face it, a lot of what’s to come in adulthood will ultimately be out of your comfort zone.

Take a weekend trip somewhere new or pick up an instrument you’ve always wanted to try. Run a 5k or find an interesting recipe to prepare (you’ll be cooking a lot more on your own once you’re in college…) or download an app and start learning a new language for fun.

Trying something new will broaden your horizons and prepare you for the excitement of the unknown!

Advice for Graduates #5: Plan for the Next Chapter

What’s next? Chance are you’re heading to college, in which case, as you know, there’s plenty to be done before you head off! You’ll want to go shopping for dorm essentials, get your schedule locked down, order any necessary textbooks, make travel plans, and so on.

If you’re working this summer, it’s a great idea to save money—for college, travel, your own apartment, etc. If you’re heading out on your own in any capacity, now’s a great time to learn how to budget.

Or, are you entering the workforce? Taking a gap year? Volunteering overseas for a program like Habitat for Humanity? Whatever direction you’re heading in, it’s good to have a plan, which will help you take all of the necessary steps to ensure your greater success. For example, do you need a passport? Do you need a cleaned-up resume? Never underestimate the power of making a list, and get to it!

Oh, And Don’t Forget to Seek Out Scholarship Money!

If you’re heading to college or planning to attend in the near future, now is the perfect time to start searching for scholarship money to help you pay for school!

There are scholarships out there for everyone, and Scholly Search makes it super easy to find scholarships tailored just to you.

What’s better than free money?

Happy scholarship hunting and happy summer!

Checkout the other amazing features Scholly offers, including Scholly Editor, a personal proofreader, and Scholly Math, an AI-powered math solver that instantly interprets and solves any problem. Hello, college success!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Scholly is proud to have partnered with Freeform to help student loan borrowers pay off $125,000 in student loan debt! After receiving over 160,000 applications, 3 winners were chosen!

Meet The Winners

Michelle is a first-generation college student currently working as an Intern Recruiter and Staffing Partner. She faced intense financial hardship after her family lost their home to a house fire during her senior year of high school, causing her to attend 3 universities throughout her time as an undergraduate. By winning the grown-ish Student Loan Payoff Program, Michelle hopes to create the financial freedom to purchase a home, support her parent’s financial needs, and provide a storied legacy for the next generation of her family.

After graduating from college and serving as an AmeriCorp volunteer, Jeffrey landed his dream job as a 4th-grade teacher. However, he has had to work multiple jobs throughout his 6 years of public school teaching in order to repay his student loans, often living paycheck-to-paycheck. By winning the grown-ish Student Loan Payoff Program, Jeffrey hopes to have the financial freedom to focus 100% on the work that means most to him.

Kendall works as a software engineer and has dreams of starting his own App Development & Consultation company. Kendall has had a knack for technology since growing up as his family’s “personal IT guy.” He hopes to close the technology-information gap that exists for many today. Winning the grown-ish Student Loan Payoff Program will help him make further strides toward his entrepreneurial goals, as well as give back financially to his family.

Thanks to everyone who applied to the grown-ish Student Loan Payoff Program!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Recently Cadillac enlisted Scholly to help tell our Founder and CEO, Christopher’s Gray’s story as part of their Dare Greatly campaign. See how Chris overcame adversity through hard work, tenacity and hope, to find over $1.3 Million in Scholarships. He now has dedicated his life to making the process of finding Scholarships easier, faster and more streamlined, in the hopes that more people can find free money to go to the college of their dreams, and achieve all that life has to offer. Scholly matches High School seniors, current undergraduates, and grad students with Scholarships that are matched specifically for them, increasing success, and opportunity for all.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Happy Black History Month! February is a time for celebrating the history and achievements of African-Americans. Since it’s also financial aid awareness month, we thought we’d do what we do best, and give you the inside scoop on scholarships looking to help black and other minority students this season. Here are our top picks.

Vinson & Elkins Diversity Scholarships

Award: $10,000 plus an internship

Deadline: April 1st

For: Minority Texas high school seniors looking to pursue legal studies

First up is an opportunity for our future advocates. Started in 1990, the Vinson & Elkins law firm targets students of color and LGBTQ students who wish to study law but are in need of financial assistance. Not only are there 7 awards up for grabs, but the firm also offers their scholars internships and mentoring. Students must be in the top 20% of their class, score higher than 1100 on the SAT or 22 on the ACT, and write a personal statement of 500-1500 words.

Minority Teachers of Illinois (MTI) Scholarship Program

Award: $5,000 per year

Deadline: March 1st

For: Minority undergrad and grad students who want to be teachers

If you’re a minority student from Illinois with a passion for education, this program is for you. MTI will sponsor minority students who want to teach in any capacity. Applicants must be enrolled in or accepted to an institution of higher learning and maintain a 2.5 GPA to keep the scholarship.

Ruth D. Peterson Fellowship for Racial and Ethnic Diversity

Award: $6,000

Deadline: March 1st

For: PhD Minority criminal justice and criminology students

This one if for our social justice warriors. Named after Ruth D. Peterson, a professor of sociology at Ohio State University – whose research focuses on ethnic inequality in crime and consequences of criminal justice policies for racial and ethnic minorities – the fellowship hopes to alleviate underrepresentation in the field by helping students of color complete their degrees. There are 3 awards up for grabs. They want to know everything: a resume, a personal statement, a statement of need, your career plans and passion for the subject, and 3 reference letters.

American Bus Association (ABA) Diversity Scholarship

Award: $5,000

Deadline: April 4th

For: Undergraduate minority students studying fields related to travel and tourism

The American Bus Association wants more minority students in the management and operation ranks of the transportation, travel, and tourism industry. If transportation gets you rolling (excuse the pun), tell the ABA how you hope to participate in the future of transport, motor coach, travel, or tourism or hospitality in a 500-word essay.

Lagrant Foundation Scholarships

Award: $3,750 for grad students; $2,500 for undergrads

Deadline: February 28th

For: Minority students looking to work in advertising, marketing and public relations

Know how to make a sell? The Lagrant Foundation is dedicated to increasing minority representation in marketing, advertising, and PR. 30 lucky undergrads and 20 lucky grads with a passion for the field will be selected as scholars in this program. Applicants must have a 3.0 GPA and answer 3 essay questions as a part of their application.

American Chemistry Society (ACS) Scholars Program

Award: $5,000

Deadline: March 1st

For: Minority high school senior and undergraduate chemistry nerds

If you’re suspicious of atoms because they make up everything, then you’re in the right place. The ACS wants to help minority students with renewable scholarships to ensure their success. They want to see your official transcripts, 2 letters of recommendation, and a copy of your Student Aid Report (SAR).

A. Grace Lee Mims Vocal Scholarship

Award: $10,000

Deadline: March 15th

For: African-American graduate/doctoral vocal students

Sponsored by the Cleveland foundation, this program continues the tradition of Negro spiritual singing – an art form created by enslaved Africans in America. African-American students who want to perform and/or teach the art are encouraged to apply. On top of a general application, they want to see 3 letters of recommendation, an audio tape of a recent performance, personal statement, and a budget for your educational expenses.

Blacks at Microsoft Scholarships

Award: $5,000 per year

Deadline:  March 8th

For: Black high school seniors interested in tech

The employee resource group Blacks@Microsoft are looking for the next generation of black tech buffs. They’re giving out 2 awards and $1,500 to 5 runners-up on their way to college. They want to see 2 letters of recommendation, your resume, transcript, and 2 essays. If you’re interested in engineering, computer science, computer information systems, or select business programs (such as finance, business administration, or marketing) then this is not an opportunity you want to miss.

Sachs Foundation Undergraduate Scholarship

Award: $6,000 per year

Deadline: April 15th

For whom: Black high school seniors in Colorado

The Sachs foundation sponsors talented college-bound high school students in the state of Colorado. If you have a 3.0 GPA, and are in need of financial aid, this general scholarship is perfect for you.

American Library Association (ALA) Spectrum Scholarship

Award: $5,000

Deadline: March 1st

For whom: Minority library and information studies graduate students

Calling all book worms who prefer novels over humans – this scholarship is for you! ALA wants to address the issue of underrepresentation in the librarian profession with their Spectrum program. This one-time award also comes with a membership to ALA and an all-expenses paid 3-day trip to the Spectrum Leadership Institute catered to Spectrum scholars.

That’s only a taste of all the opportunities we have found for you on Scholly. If you’re looking for more, look no further. With personalized scholarship-matching, in-app tracking tools to make sure you never miss a beat, and an AI-powered writing assistant, Scholly is your best chance at debt-free education.

Happy Black History Month and happy applying!

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
With over 300,000 people in America googling ‘scholarships’ every year, the demand for scholarships is high – and so is the risk of falling victim to a scholarship scam. With “opportunity for all” being our mantra, we want to make sure students are protected. These are our go-to’s for sussing out the real opportunities.

Red Flags

There are several warning signs with scholarship scams. If you come across one of these red flags, file a complaint to one of the bodies outlined in the next section.

Never apply to a scholarship with an application fee. The whole point of a scholarship is to help students pay for their education, not make money from them. If they are asking you for money, they aren’t legit.

Do not apply to a scholarship with money-back offers of guarantees. They should award money when someone has won a scholarship, not when they’re applying.

If a scholarship claims to provide ‘exclusive information’ it’s shady. A real scholarship program won’t bait you into applying for any other reason than to help you pay for school.

The most obvious sign of a scholarship scam is an application that requests credit card or banking information. DO NOT VOLUNTEER YOUR FINANCIAL INFORMATION like social security numbers under any circumstances. No one needs access to your finances to help you pay for school.

Common Scams

‘Phishing’ and ‘Pharming’ scams are two of the most common internet scams.

Phishing scams are unsolicited emails from sources pretending to be a reputable company that encourage you to reveal personal information, likely passwords, credit card numbers, and account numbers. These emails will bear a logo of your bank or credit card company to trick you.

Pharming scams are like phishing scams, except scammers will drive you to a bogus website that mimics a legitimate one to get you to volunteer your personal and financial information. Both scams can come in the form of emails so be sure that you set your spam filters for your inbox.

See Something, Say Something

If you come across any of the examples listed, alert authorities so that other financial aid-seeking students or anyone does not fall victim to a scam. There are a few official bodies to whom you can report suspicious activity.

National Fraud Information Center (NCIF)

Visit their website, www.fraud.org to file a complaint online

Federal Trade Commission (FTC)

Go to www.ftc.gov/scholarshipscams to file a complaint online or write to:

Federal Trade Commission Consumer

Response Center

600 Pennsylvania Ave., NW

Washington, DC 20580

State Attorney General’s Office

You can also file complaints with the Protection Division in your state. Visit www.naag.org to find your state Attorney General’s Office.

US Postal Inspection Service (USPIS)

Use this body to report mail fraud at postalinspectors.uspis.gov, or call the Crime Hotline at 877-876-2455 or write to:

Criminal Investigations Service Center

222 S. Riverside Plaza, Ste. 1250

Chicago, IL 60606-6100

Better Business Bureau

File an online complaint about a business at www.bbb.org or all 703-276-0100

How Scholly Protects You

We want you to win so we bring you the best scholarships possible. We base our quality assistance on three central tenets:

1. We never add sweepstakes scholarships to our database. These kinds of scholarships have many applicants and decrease you chances of actually winning.

2. We do not house scholarships that require membership in an organization or program. Our motto is ‘Opportunity for All’ which means we want scholarships that are open to the public.

3. Scholarships that require users to sign up for a product or service as a part of the application process are also not added to our database. We want you to focus on what’s important here, and that is getting money for school.

Scholarships can change lives, but so can scholarship scams. Be sure you’re changing your life for the better, with Scholly.

Find Scholarship Matches
Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
One of Scholly’s most compelling stories is that of Sunny Sandhu a student who used Scholly to win over $600,000 in scholarships to attend Princeton University. Today we share with you Sunny’s personal experience with winning scholarships and how significant they can be to achieving your dreams. Here’s the story of how a student set his dreams on Ivy League school, created his plan, and grew to see them fulfilled.

He won nearly every major scholarship (and many others) including the Gates Millennium Scholarship, Coca Cola Scholarship, and Jack Cook Kent Scholarship. These scholarships will help him attend school debt free. Sunny is an inspiration to us and we know he’ll be an inspiration to you.

Check out the video here and be sure to share it with your friends.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
BOBBY ROBINSON

Winner of the Scholly + CommonBond $10,000 Scholarship.

“I see myself financially stable, with good credit, hopefully still in the Marine Corps, leading Marines,” Robinson said. “At that point in my life, I will start giving back to my community.”

For now, he’s on the receiving end — and with goals like these, it’s clear that he’s a deserving candidate.

This month, Robinson was awarded a $10,000 scholarship from Scholly & CommonBond. The award furthers Scholly’s commitment to connecting students with scholarship opportunities nationwide, and CommonBond’s goal of making higher education financing more affordable and transparent to invest in the futures of students.

Robinson found out about the scholarship opportunity by simply searching through opportunities on the Scholly mobile app. But how did he find out that he’d actually won?

“Honestly, I was just getting out of a rifle drill with the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC), and I saw the email and I ran out of the room,” said Robinson, a current freshman pursuing his bachelor’s degree at Savannah State University in Georgia. “The first thing I did was share the news with one of my senior officers.”

“I couldn’t believe that I was awarded so much money — $10,000 means I can be comfortable financially because I won’t have student debt this year, and I can continue to focus on preparing myself for the Marine Corps mentally, physically and spiritually when I graduate from college.”

Robinson is hopeful his education will lead him to where he wants to be in a decade. Looking back, Bobby has already overcome a number of obstacles to achieve his goals.

For one, no one in his family had ever gone to college.

Born in Miami, Robinson grew up hoping that a scholarship to play football would pave the way to a four-year school (and even the National Football League). When he realized his more realistic route of attending college came via enlisting, he did just that.

“I made a goal to be the first in my family to attend college, but I never knew how I was going to be able to pay for college since my mom was not able to be able to pay,” he said. “But I knew some way or somehow I was going to make it through college without her worrying.”

“I made a goal to be the first in my family to attend college, but I never knew how I was going to be able to pay for college since my mom was not able to be able to pay,” he said. “But I knew some way or somehow I was going to make it through college without her worrying.”

A $10,000 scholarship certainly helps.

Robinson’s tuition is covered by the Navy, but his actual cost of attendance is financed in a number of ways. He was previously awarded a Pell Grant and took subsidized and unsubsidized federal loans from the government, and said the Scholly-CommonBond check will help him cover the costs of his housing (nearly $4,000). He also credited Savannah State’s financial aid counselors with helping him find as much gift aid as he can grab.

Robinson said he will continue to use Scholly’s app to find scholarship listings, and he is just getting familiar with CommonBond, which recently launched student loans for undergraduates like him as well as for graduate students.

If his dream of becoming a Marine Corps Officer in three years comes to fruition, Robinson plans to use his active duty salary to pay off his student loan debt within three years of graduating.

Before looking too far ahead, of course, he’s thinking more pointedly about what is of most concern to many students in America — his next year of college.

“I’m excited about sophomore year because I will be going into fall semester with an actual feel of college, so I will know what to expect and how to better balance class, work and NROTC,” he said. “I look forward to taking the good and the bad from my freshman year and applying it to my sophomore year to better myself as an individual, as a scholar and as a leader.”

Robinson, long interested in psychology, is majoring in behavioral analysis. He said he hopes to use his degree to communicate effectively with senior and junior Marines.

“My freshman year has been quite challenging,” Robinson said. “As Midshipmen, we have to realize that we are not the average college student. It’s a lot of responsibility as soon as you step foot on campus.”

About Scholly and CommonBond

Scholly is the scholarship-matching platform that has helped high school seniors, current undergraduates, and graduate students win over $70 Million for their education. Our web and mobile app turns the long months of search for scholarships into minutes, by delivering a smarter, targeted list of scholarships that are uniquely suited to you. It was created by Christopher Gray who won $1.3 million in scholarships through hard work, grit and determination. Realizing how broken and time consuming this process was, he and his team created Scholly to make things a lot easier for you. Find out more, and join Scholly at www.myscholly.com.

CommonBond is a financial technology company on a mission to give students and graduates more transparent, simple, and affordable ways to pay for higher education. By designing a better student loan experience that combines advanced technology with competitive rates and award-winning customer service, CommonBond has funded $1 billion in loans for its tens of thousands of members. The company’s enterprise platform, CommonBond for Business™, enables employees to receive a suite of student loan repayment benefits from their employer. CommonBond is the first and only finance company with a “one-for-one” social mission: for every loan it funds, CommonBond also funds the education of a child in need, through its partnership with Pencils of Promise. For more information, visit www.commonbond.co.

Share
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
